Title: 2011 review
Date: 2011-12-23 10:31
Author: markos
Category: Catchall
Slug: 2011-review

It's hard to judge importance of events as they are unfolding or soon
afterwards, but 2011 feels in many ways like a historical year and I
will be amazed if it doesn't prove to be such. Arab spring and
[unresolved eurozone
crisis](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-16290598)alone practically
guarantee that this will be a year to remember although it's too soon to
say in what light. There are definitely plenty of good reasons to worry,
but there always are.

This year was also a year of big personal changes. I left
[Zemanta](http://www.zemanta.com/ "Zemanta's homepage") in summer and
went on sabbatical. Leaving a company in  the middle of economic crisis
doesn't sound like a prudent idea, but I've yet to regret it. I started
contributing open source before I left, but having more time certainly
helped me do more of it and with a bit of luck I may even finish first
version of my web Instapaper client before this year runs out.

I built
[Supervizor](http://supervizor.kpk-rs.si/ "Supervizor's homepage") with
Primož, which is a project I am most proud of. We haven't done
everything we set to do yet and we unlikely will this year, but I hope
that in early 2012 Supervizor's data will become easily accessible.

There were lots of experiments on myself. Having a list of possible (and
finished) projects on wall feels liberating. Counting books I read
[doesn't
work](http://markos.gaivo.net/blog/?p=664 "My post on gamification of reading"),
but digital sabbath is great. I left Twitter for better use of my time,
but it's really too soon to tell. I  learned and did a lot, more than I
expected, but as always less than I hoped. Somewhat unintentionally we
reduced our carbon footprint further even though we traveled a lot.

I also finally found time to really reflect on what I want to do and my
[personal research
agenda](http://codinginparadise.org/weblog/2007/08/creating-personal-research-agenda.html "Brad Neuberg's post on creating personal reasearch agenda")
is getting more of a shape. I want to work most on use of open data to
improve civic engagement and exploring [social software for
introverts](http://markos.gaivo.net/blog/?p=865#reading-sources-note-2 "Link to definition in second annotation").

So what will 2012 bring?

Nobody really knows, but this year it became clear to me that I want my
work to be more socially engaged and I am thrilled I got an opportunity
to join amazing people at
[Aptivate](http://www.aptivate.org/ "Aptivate's homepage") for I hope a
long time. I'll continue to work on a so far semi-public open data
project which I am sure will become public soon. I plan to read lots of
books, but start less than two new projects. I am sure I won't finish
everything I set to do, but that's alright. We always overestimate what
we can do in a year and underestimate what we can do in ten so I  just
need to keep going.

And surely I will continue to worry. There are only more reasons to
despair over environment and eurozone of today might not be around this
time next year. However we are not pilling on canned food yet so
optimist in me obviously hasn't completely died yet.

But first I will enjoy holidays. I hope you will too and I wish you a
happy new year.

