Title: 2013 review
Date: 2014-01-01 23:22
Author: markos
Category: Catchall
Slug: 2013-review

Happy and healthy new year! May it be better than the last one.

A year that started with [Aaron
Swartz’s](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aaron_Swartz) death and ended
with [Nelson Mandela’s](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nelson_Mandela)
never had a chance of being a good one even without Snowden’s
revelations and a never-ending supply of bleak news. Alas I promised
last year to abstain from commenting on external events to keep annual
review posts slashed-wrists risk free.

In some ways this year for me was a lot like the previous one. I worried
about health of my family while continuing being lucky and otherwise
happy. Today is two years since I started working at
[Aptivate](http://aptivate.org/) and my enthusiasm hasn’t diminished one
iota. So one thing I learned is that I am \*not\* an incorrigible
curmudgeon that can’t stay put.

I learned a lot, especially from mentoring. It really is a blessing to
have a wickedly smart and inquisitive mentee and I can’t recommend the
experience enough.

I also learned to dive, which will not be a serious hobby but is a
convenient skill to have. Visit to
[Socotra](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Socotra) sadly won’t happen and
neither will I dive in south France, but who knows what this year will
bring.

What has worked and what not? Monthly reminders of my plans worked fine.
I mostly ignored them (plans, not reminders), but at least I was doing
this consciously and the frequency was right too so I’ll keep doing them
this year. And it’s not like my plans changed only because of my
fickleness. Mid-year killing of Google Reader unexpectedly made me busy
with search for alternatives and writing exporter for my data in time. I
didn’t have time to write a more suitable interface for querying and
displaying said data and probably won’t this year either.

List of possible and unfinished projects is still liberating. With added
dates of edits it also documents development of my priorities and I
don’t mind that I don’t do most of it as long as I do some (which I
did).

Digital sabbath also remains a good idea. I haven’t written the overview
of books I read in 2013 yet, but I did compare dates on which I finished
a book with [my Github history](https://github.com/samastur) and it is
obvious that I can either read books or code in my free time, but not
both unless I actually reserve time for it.

Another thing that proved itself is the importance of continuity of
work. Small everyday steps have bigger effect than occasional sprints
and they work better when I have a good to-do list which I didn’t always
have.

I made an experiment this summer when I spent a day a week working on
non-Aptivate project to learn and refresh my knowledge of Javascript
tools and techniques and to see what to expect if I spent a day a week
on personal projects. It didn’t work as well as I hoped. Day a week + a
few hours on other days certainly moves things forward, but it is not a
particularly satisfying experience for anyone involved and likely not
sustainable either.

What I think would work better (for me) is to combine those off-days
together into continuous chunks (say a week every 5 weeks or 2 every 10)
for concentrated development of more complex parts of my projects and
use those spare daily hours in-between for polishing and infrastructure.
Painful side of this is that it reveals how little time I would actually
have even if I had noticeably more of it. I am not sure yet what if
anything to do with this.

This realisation also led to a painful acceptance of
[Sebastjan](https://twitter.com/trepca)’s observation that being too
busy is simply a function of not pruning ambitions enough. So in 2014 I
plan to read less. Who knows how many but I expect noticeably fewer than
20 books.

I will also not work on open data projects except maybe participating on
hack days (if there will be any). To be honest I haven’t done much
anyway, but I still wasted time and energy worrying about it.

Instead of building tools like [mjp](https://github.com/samastur/mjp) or
[image-diet](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/image-diet) I intend to be
more egoistical and work on projects I talked about for years, but never
came around developing.  Current projects will likely receive only bug
fixes.

Any personal Python software project that will start in 2014 will be
written in Python3. Clearly there is no better way to become proficient
in it. Actually I expect to start only one project after I finish my
current one.

I’ve been writing development journal since October and it is a bit
early to say how it is going. I think it is providing insight to what I
actually do, but at the same time I am still learning what to record and
how. Will see what this year brings.

I’ll be 40 this year which should happen soon enough to not be a
challenge and also provides a great motivation to fix my utter failure
of this year of getting myself more fit.

My expectations are not evolved enough to be plans, but I imagine 2014
to be even more development intensive than 2013 was. It seems I won’t be
attending many conferences, but I don’t expect to be bored. More than
anything I hope it will be great year for my family and friends.

