Title: Accessibility after @media
Date: 2005-06-20 23:07
Author: markos
Category: Web
Slug: accessibility-after-media

I still haven't managed to write my promised or planned articles,
including framestack technique, but I'm still optimistic to finish them
before the end of month. Well, sort of anyway, since time is not on my
side.

The thing that probably hit me most at @media was accessibility and
issues surrounding it. I'm still one of those evil people, pushing
Javascript too far. But hey, I do care and I'm trying to find good,
accessible solutions for what I'm building and failing behind schedule
as result. Not far enough to worry yet though.

It seems same thing is on other people's minds as well and they wrote a
lot of good stuff about it. [Andy
Clarke](http://www.stuffandnonsense.co.uk/archives/the_role_of_government_in_web_accessibility.html)
would like to see more education and tax breaks for developers for money
spent on learning and developing assistive technology. Andy Budd
[thought](http://www.andybudd.com/archives/2005/06/accessibility_and_the_law/index.php)
about why legislation is necessary and
[Veerle](http://veerle.duoh.com/comments.php?id=354_0_2_0_C) has a good
suggestion of actually awarding good behavior. As far as I know such
incentives worked quite well for ecological issues.

I'd just like to add a word or two about situation in Slovenia, where to
the best of my knowledge we don't have such legislation and almost
nobody cares about it. What I found encouraging in London was the number
of people who cared and I believe legislation has played a part in
making people notice.

