Title: Android's design reflections
Date: 2011-10-30 16:40
Author: markos
Category: Catchall
Slug: androids-design-reflections

I bought a Samsung Nexus phone in September after almost 4 years of
being a happy [Nokia
E65](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nokia_E65 "Nokia E65") user. I
switched because I didn't have an Android phone to test websites against
and it would be stupid to buy something expensive just to lay on my
table waiting for an occasional test.

A month of use is enough to get a solid impression, but not enough to
really know a modern phone. Which is alright, since I don't want to
write a pro-cons review of Android. Better ones have already been
written. I am more intrigued by what design hints about its creators and
their environment. Hints, not tells, because I know Android's authors
even less than I do my phone, which is to say I don't know them at all
and could well be wrong. Enough of disclaimers and let's proceed with
this Sherlock-like conjecture.

Data roaming is something that ought to be common, but is usually an
obscenely expensive luxury and it's nice that Android lets you turn it
off to prevent unexpected expenses. However home network may not be
cheap or unlimited either and what I really liked about an otherwise
severely limited email client on [Nokia
N900](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nokia_N900 "Nokia N900") is that you
could set automatic email retrieval to proceed only when connected to
WiFi. Alas there are no connection based settings for data syncing. So
this feature was designed for countries where cheap-enough data
connection is available to most or in expectation that this will soon be
so.

Notifications are an important part of Android's experience and are done
well enough to inspire iPhone's. They are also less important to me than
Android believes they should be. Pull-down notification system was
obviously built for a steady stream of messages and as such would
benefit from a few more options. Like K9 mail's quiet time during which
it would not check for new messages (or just be silent if it gets them).
I'd also love to be able to set a different volume based on type of
messages. I care about (rare) text messages, but don't want to be
bothered with Twitter's deluge. However if I wanted to be notified about
everything as soon as it happens, then I would just love what I got. I
know many social media users who surely do.

The under-appreciated side of Nokia has always been company's
understanding that mobile users around world are not same. Android
however doesn't care about subtleties. E.g. selecting language of your
interface will also select when week starts (is it Monday or Sunday?).
This would be a great shortcut for setting locale in one swoop, but is
incredibly annoying when you want/need to override it.

None of my examples is actually a bug or even necessary a bad (business)
decision. I talked about Android, but most of what I said also applies
to iPhones. While I do think smartphones will eventually end up in hands
of practically all phone users, I do not believe that economies of scale
or environment will work equally for all. I am not sure if designing
mostly for affluent is wrong, but I do think it's sad.

