Title: Bolivia - land of llamas, mines and amazing beauty
Date: 2012-08-01 23:42
Author: markos
Category: Catchall
Slug: bolivia-land-of-llamas-mines-and-amazing-beauty

It's been a month since we returned from our  traveling around
[Bolivia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bolivia). It was the most
exhausting trip I have ever done and I ended up so weak that what ought
to be a minor cold landed me in bed for few days. Luckily this happened
only *after* our return, but still I didn't get to write this post then
and I've been struggling to find time for it every since.

[![Red
hills](http://farm8.staticflickr.com/7113/7606099564_1cc119998a_n.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/markos/sets/72157630657887612/ "Photos from Bolivia")

I am not sure why I was so tired. We did spend quite a lot of time
trekking, but not really more than we are used to. I suspect it had
something to do with high altitude and sheer amount of information my
brains tried to digest. A month of travel may sound long^<span
id="bolivia-1">[[1]](#bolivia-note-1)</span>^, but it's really too short
to get to know a country especially one so big and unfamiliar as
Bolivia. Best you can hope for is to learn enough to give your ignorance
a bit of  a shape.

It is also too short because you will need more time than you expect.
One advice you hear often is that something will go wrong. It happened
to us too and though you can be disappointed at times, you'll mostly
have fun, be amazed^<span id="bolivia-2">[[2]](#bolivia-note-2)</span>^
and sometimes even shocked. Our schedule was packed and it will take me
months to process all that we have seen and experienced, but I hope we
can return soon.

Finding reasons to visit Bolivia is easy. Finding help for organizing
this trip may prove more difficult. Pick an agency and search will turn
up somebody who had a horrible experience with them. Not us though. We
met amazing people who really worked hard to make our trip unforgettable
which leads me to real reason for writing this post.

If you intend to go and would like some local help, here are our
recommendations.

There is no shortage of hotels in La Paz and mid range [hotel
Rosario](http://www.hotelrosario.com/la-paz/) has deservedly
consistently high reviews. It has great front desk staff (especially
Ximenia), nice rooms and location. Dinners are consistently great too,
but I would avoid lunch. Same kitchen but apparently different team and
what you get might not be *exactly* what you ordered.

[America Tours](http://www.america-ecotours.com/) is a travel agency
recommended by Lonely Planet which can help you organize your way around
country. Speed with which they were able to organize alternatives to our
cancelled our trip to Madidi (thanks Amazsonas for nothing) was simply
amazing.

Most people who visit Potosi stay in town. It's certainly cheaper than
alternatives, but if you can afford it, then a good place to stay is at
[hotel museo Cayara](http://www.hotelmuseocayara.com/) that is about
half an hour drive away. Museum and a chance to talk to Arturo alone are
worth it. Hacienda that has been there since 1557 is in the middle of
beautiful nature and away of polluted surroundings of Potosi and is a
popular destination for daily trips organized by travel agencies in
Potosi (a good alternative for those on small budgets).

Usual way of seeing the largest salt flat in world is to travel to Uyuni
and take a trip with one of many unreliable operators who are often
hostages to their prone-to-drinking drivers. I believe it is better to
travel to Tupiza (if you have time) and take a slightly longer tour. We
had really good experience with [Tupiza
Tours](http://www.tupizatours.com/index.php), but my advice to those who
prefer email for arranging their trips, is to start at least a couple of
weeks before they go because girls at Tupiza Tours seem to be swamped in
work. Or call them if you can. If you pick them, then ask for Hernan
Cordova, the best off-road driver we have ever met (and Spanish speaking
guide), and Jeaneth Menchaca Condori if you need an English speaking
guide. They went above and beyond their duty, really made every effort
to anticipate our wishes and needs and had an unlimited amount of
patience.

There are many agencies in La Paz that will take you trekking and prices
vary significantly. [Andean Summits](http://www.andeansummits.com/) is
certainly not among the cheapest, but they are very professional and
accommodating (like with our last minute request to change dates of our
trek). Ask also for Gustavo Miranda Hulliri, who apart from being a
great cook and camp manager also seems to know every path there is. This
can be really useful if you, say, get really weak because you were
throwing up all previous day.

Tourist guides in Bolivia have to be certified. Most of them studied
tourism and are very good. Still we were especially impressed by Julia
Catunta Janco who consistently surprised us with showing us things we
wouldn't even think of asking. She would be our first choice unless you
go climbing. Contact me if you need her email address.

One sure sign that your guide was really good is that saying goodbye
feels like leaving a good friend. It is a feeling we didn't expect
before, but felt repeatedly once we were there. Life is too short to
visit every place we would like to see, but I still have no doubt that
we will return. I hope this post has been of some help to those of you
who might be thinking of visiting Bolivia.

1.  <div id="bolivia-note-1">

    </div>

    Popular stereotype of a Japanese tourist used to be someone who took
    pictures non-stop. Someone explained to me once that this is a
    necessary memory aid for short vacations with packed schedule
    because it can help you recall and organize memories later when
    you're back. I don't know if this is true for Japanese, but it is
    certainly true for me.[↩](#bolivia-1)
2.  <div id="bolivia-note-2">

    </div>

    I knew Bolivia was rich in minerals, but I had no idea that there
    were so many mines which often exist in the most inhospitable
    places. Even big scale mining (such as for silver around Potosi) is
    usually done individually and this is even more true for small mines
    where there may be only 10 or so miners risking their life. It's
    very hard and often short way to live that can still be better than
    alternatives.[↩](#bolivia-1)

