Title: Chirp, Squawk, Cackle, or Honk*
Date: 2014-07-10 17:01
Author: markos
Category: Web
Slug: chirp-squawk-cackle-or-honk

Disappointed I stopped using Twitter at the end of 2011 and have since
visited it mostly to follow up specific references. As a medium I found
it lacking but ignorable until recently. While I was reading about the
aptly named [Jacobinghazi affair](http://imgur.com/a/nUX1A) I felt the
urge to tweet and pronounce Twitter as possibly [more toxic than
Facebook](https://twitter.com/samastur/status/476707986006880256).

This article has been provoked by
[Tomaž's](http://www.tablix.org/~avian/blog/) polite disagreement and is
my late attempt to explain what I couldn’t on Twitter.

My objections
-------------

Leon Wieseltier recently described Twitter as [a place of infinite
discharge of emotion and
promotion](http://www.newrepublic.com/article/118125/leon-wieseltier-responds-alain-de-bottons-attack-twitter)
where nothing intellectually or linguistically substantial can be
accomplished. It is a great and true enough description of Twitter.

Over the years a number of articles have discussed effects of new media
on society in its largest sense. While I am interested in those my
comment was mainly about Twitter’s role in shaping how individuals and
communities think, communicate and behave.

In blogging heyday I thoroughly disliked celebration of rapid exchange
of half-baked ideas. Making them smaller and exchange more rapid is not
an improvement. Ideas have always been cheap and plentiful when untested
and inspiring to the unwitting. Twitter is vast and there may be much
worth reading, but chances are most of what you will read will be soon
forgotten fluff. Creating on a medium like Twitter is hard since most
things worth saying can’t be clearly expressed in 140 characters, nuance
is valued even less than continuity and every good tweet can be buried
in a pile of inane responses.

One of the reasons why I originally stopped using Twitter was
realisation that I found tweets from a fair number of otherwise
congenial and intelligent people regularly off-putting. Twitter did not
suddenly found their previously hidden depravity, instead its forced
brevity of semi-public discourse made a great deal of it sound like
movie informants wearing a wire. It is a great demonstration of how
dialogue changes when we think others are listening and an insidious
tool for normalising blanket snooping, much of it our own.

Research has shown that our brains keep adapting to their use and
improving one skill often leads to deterioration of another or as
McLuhan put it: “Every extension is also an amputation.” I lost count of
people describing their difficulty with reading longer, more slowly
developing articles after an expectation of instant gratification has
been built by a steady diet of short ones. It doesn’t get more instant
than a tweet and Twitter’s interface is optimised for non-discriminative
reading of a never ending stream of tweets.^<span
id="twitter-toxic-1">[[1]](#twitter-toxic-1-note)</span>^ Can this
really be good for a thinking person?

My tweet which led to this piece was provoked by an absolutely absurd
argument closely matching Alan Jacob’s description of [Twitter at its
worst](http://text-patterns.thenewatlantis.com/2013/12/twitter-at-its-worst.html).
Maybe worst, but certainly not rare. Of course arguments with all the
negative baggage are not exclusive to Twitter, but Twitter does seem a
more emotive medium than most of them. Discussions on Twitter are
commonly a sad sight because it isn’t built for dialog. It is a
marketing machine and works best when used as such.^<span
id="twitter-toxic-2">[[2]](#twitter-toxic-2-note)</span>^ Unsurprisingly
millions of its users conform to its design hints by sharing content or
less obviously with signalling group membership by snarking and
sloganeering at sometimes only imagined opposition.

Ian Danskin’s [“This is Phil
Fish”](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PmTUW-owa2w) video essay^<span
id="twitter-toxic-3">[[3]](#twitter-toxic-3-note)</span>^ about the
nature of online fame recently made rounds and I can’t recommend it
enough. Fame can appear without being sought and the longer it lasts,
the more likely it is that the famous will become a stand-in for a
concept to which public often responds negatively. This is especially
unpleasant and difficult to deal with when the negative concept is tied
not to what you did, but who you are or are perceived to be.

On Twitter (as previously noted) tweets may be written with a recipient
in mind, but can be seen by anyone so all of them contribute to our
public image without it being in our control.^<span
id="twitter-toxic-4">[[4]](#twitter-toxic-4-note)</span>^ Controlling
tweets comprehension and propagation by relying on cultural norms to
differentiate audiences does not work because those norms may not be
well known and are certainly not accepted by everyone.

We speak when we want to pass on an idea. Amplifying ideas of others can
be worthy, but we are more enriched when new ideas are created and
explored. The really interesting ones can be controversial, rough and in
need of a nurturing environment in which to develop. Twitter is not that
place.

Mobbing and repression of unpopular opinion happens almost everywhere
where opinions can be expressed, but the immediacy, ease of response and
pay-off make Twitter particularly popular with trolls, sociopaths and
anybody willing to goad their followers into collective sectarian
hysteria. There will always be enough of them willing to tweet before
thinking to pummel into silence everyone but the most determined. Only
ideas at first protected by obscurity can develop and flourish in
environment without boundaries.

Three pillars of Twitter design
-------------------------------

Twitter earns money by showing ads. There’s another reason to be careful
with any ad-based business beyond worrying about their usually
insatiable hunger for our privacy. Its value is proportional to the
amount of our time it captures.^<span
id="twitter-toxic-5">[[5]](#twitter-toxic-5-note)</span>^ Seeing ads on
a site you frequent should trigger an examination of how much time you
are willing to spend there.

I disliked Twitter’s design until I realised that its main purposes are
spreading messages and increasing its use. It does those two things
splendidly and kudos to Twitter’s designers.

I am obviously not privy to any internal information, but to me the
foundation of Twitter’s design are three main values: terseness,
immediacy and broadcasting.

Terseness is of course the well known restriction of 140 characters per
tweet because of a technical limitation which does not really exist any
more. Its effect on writing however remains because writing thoughts
longer than 140 characters is awkward and will in newest-tweets-first
Twitter applications always result in a broken reading experience. It is
ill-suited for human dialogue because we don’t express ourselves at
tweet lengths and we don’t hear responses first. Life is not
[Jeopardy!](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jeopardy!) and it is not a
coincidence that most messaging applications put newest messages at the
bottom.

So why doesn’t Twitter raise the limit? I can only speculate, but I
believe there are other benefits to Twitter beyond the limit’s role in
Twitter’s brand. Longer text simply requires more effort from writer and
readers and makes the platform less engaging thus hurting both of the
stated Twitter’s goals.

Twitter does not use time much as a design tool beyond a core belief
that real time is the right time to deliver a message and that delivered
messages should be displayed in the opposite order they were sent which
at some point will practically guarantee broken narratives and constant
change of topic.

Most of us can’t effectively multitask because we can’t quickly switch
contexts. We cognitively suffer when we try and reading tweets from
unconnected authors in order in which they came is really just
multitasking at high speed. There is no reason to believe that we listen
as well and care as much as we would if our focus would not be
constantly drawn to the next thing. Ability to listen fully and steadily
is a difficult skill to develop, but quick to atrophy on Twitter.

Twitter may tolerate a moderate use of its platform, but certainly does
not want it. It will keep suggesting new people to follow no matter how
many you already do to keep the stream of tweets from ever drying up.
Without them you don’t have a reason to constantly check your phone for
new tweets and fewer reasons to post your own.

The other face of broadcasting is building up your audience which is how
you’ll eventually see your followers once you get enough of them to not
know many. And ever so helpful Twitter is here to get you to this point
as quickly as possible.

First it provides a crude privacy model in which either everything is
private or nothing is (ignoring direct messages that are irrelevant for
this article). This not so gentle nudge to make output public is further
supported by ubiquitous leader boards tracking followers, retweets and
favourites, constantly reminding us of everyone’s standing and relying
on our vanity to improve it. None of these would need to be so prominent
if what really mattered was sharing and chatting with your friends.
Putting a scorecard on our every utterance makes sense only if its most
important feature is their popularity.

Hoarding followers and followees has another negative effect beside
making already described ones worse. For historical reasons and because
of web app limitations twitterers often use just one account, so
subscribing to it conflates all author's interests into one stream and
while not merging different communities, it certainly exposes them more
without them having much say in it. This, together with stilted
expression, reduced comprehension and empathy, on a platform that
promotes making an instant idiot of yourself in pursuit of recognition
is, in my opinion, an important contributing factor to many heated
arguments.

In closing
----------

This is not an exhaustive list of issues I have with Twitter, not even
important ones (e.g. obtuseness of relying on any one source for
important information). Much of what I said is not unique to this
service but a lot of it feels more excessive here. What makes it
different is the platform's growing presence and influence in our
society by its successful co-opting of promoters in us. Doubtless there
is a lot of good that happens on Twitter or because of it, but the
platform is also bringing out the worst in us and I find its damaging
effects more substantial.

Writing this article reminded me of a larger point I have not made
before or not often enough. Technology is not morally neutral or
unipolar let alone inherently positive and it frustrates me that
discussions often try to cast it thus. As a practising technologist I am
obviously not a Luddite, but neither do I assume that everything I am
able to make is good even when made with best intentions. Our creations
shape what we do, how we do it and even who we are and should therefore
be critically examined for what they do for and to us.

As tools transform us and our societies I find pining for previous times
unproductive, but I do not subscribe to technological determinism. We
used freons for decades, but were perfectly capable of finding suitable
replacements when we realised that our fridges would eventually fry us.
But we did have to first realise and accept that.

\* The title of this post was borrowed from the already linked article
written by Leon Wieseltier.

1.  <div id="twitter-toxic-1-note">

    </div>

    I know there are other clients. Well, mostly were. Twitter has been
    very open with their intention of eventually replacing all of them
    with theirs which already is the only one that
    matters.[↩](#twitter-toxic-1)
2.  <div id="twitter-toxic-2-note">

    </div>

    Another thing Twitter is not trying to hide. [Twitter
    analytics](https://analytics.twitter.com/about) could hardly sound
    more marketing oriented and Twitter’s homepage is all about
    following, not creating.[↩](#twitter-toxic-2)
3.  <div id="twitter-toxic-3-note">

    </div>

    There’s [a
    transcript](http://innuendostudios.tumblr.com/post/89201006992/this-is-phil-fish-transcript)
    and while I usually prefer written word, in this case I would
    recommend to invest 20 minutes into watching the original
    video.[↩](#twitter-toxic-3)
4.  <div id="twitter-toxic-4-note">

    </div>

    Since we can’t control which tweets will be seen by whom and which
    won’t, it is impossible in the long term to really shape their
    overall perception unless they are sufficiently dehumanised or we
    consistently act out only one persona.[↩](#twitter-toxic-4)
5.  <div id="twitter-toxic-5-note">

    </div>

    Corollary of this is that it makes no sense to rely on a purportedly
    time-saving services whose revenue mostly comes from
    advertising.[↩](#twitter-toxic-5)

