Title: Dancing on Titanic
Date: 2008-12-22 19:55
Author: markos
Category: Catchall
Slug: dancing-on-titanic

December is running out of days fast and I still haven't written my
annual review of things I planned or did, intentionally or otherwise.
I've been thinking about it for a while, but couldn't find words to
express myself. Finally I gave up. I don't think I'll succeed now, but I
doubt more time would help.

For me this year has been absolutely wonderful. Coming to
[Zemanta](http://www.zemanta.com "Zemanta") meant I could work on
interesting problems to improve a tool I use myself while collaborating
with people I like and respect. I traveled to more conferences than ever
before and generally learned a lot. I'm proud of my team's achievements
and of what we did as a company. It is indeed a privilege to have a gig
like this.

I've also started a private project with a friend, which is coming along
nicely. It shouldn't be too long before we can show it to, well,
everyone interested. Hopefully that means to many.

In all, 2008 was great for me and I don't think 2009 will be worse.

Yet of late I've been feeling increasingly gloomy. This has remarkably
little to do with economic crisis, influence of which we can already
feel even if it's yet to hit with full force. I won't be traveling as
much next year, but I planned to do less of it even before I knew there
might be economic reasons to do so.

I've been worrying about the state of our planet for years. Things
weren't getting better as quickly as I thought they should. In fact,
they aren't getting better at all, but I hoped we would turn and do what
needs to be done when given last chance.

There are many things that are deeply wrong in this world. Slavery [is
more widespread](http://www.kottke.org/08/12/slavery-worse-than-ever)
than probably ever. We know we should reduce the amount of CO~2~ in
atmosphere, yet [we do
opposite](http://www.mnp.nl/en/publications/2008/GlobalCO2emissionsthrough2007.html).
Fisheries around world are rapidly
[collapsing](http://news.mongabay.com/2008/0918-hance_fish.html) taking
whole ecosystems with them. Glaciers [are
receding](http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2008/dec/10/poznan-brazil-climate-change-environment)
with probably disastrous effect on water supplies for millions of
people. Rising world population will continue to negate any progress we
may have. I [could go
on](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/south_asia/7780040.stm), but this list is
depressing enough.

After all it's not the scale or number of challenges that [is
dispiriting](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/7786910.stm).
It's our [inability to
act](http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2008/dec/12/greenpolitics-poznan)
decisively. We prefer compromises that set targets too low and then
[fail to
meet](http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/thereporters/richardblack/2008/12/when_targets_miss_the_point.html)
them. There are 6.5 billion of us, but we are still unable to face real
probability that this may be too many. I sometimes wonder how lives
looked like in last days of civilizations long gone, most of them
disappearing precisely because they taxed their environment too much. I
hope I'm wrong and never find out.

I wished to end this post on a positive note, but I'm clearly failing. I
do sincerely wish everyone happy holidays and the best of luck in next
year. I'm afraid we'll need it.

<div class="zemanta-pixie">

[![Reblog this post [with
Zemanta]](http://img.zemanta.com/reblog_e.png?x-id=67028e32-0b94-43d6-ad01-e2d3a8644143)](http://reblog.zemanta.com/zemified/67028e32-0b94-43d6-ad01-e2d3a8644143/ "Zemified by Zemanta")

</div>
