Title: Delicious Library
Date: 2006-06-28 14:22
Author: markos
Category: Company
Slug: delicious-library

A [friend](http://log.rucigaj.com/) of mine is having a lousy year. He
broke a leg, but further complications have brought him back to the
hospital. I wanted to lend him some DVD's to shorten those long hours in
bed, yet who has the time to transcribe all those titles?

Well, if you're a Mac user, then there's a program called [Delicious
Library](http://www.delicious-monster.com/) which lets you (among other
things) input those DVD's by simply scanning the barcode with a camera.
I have to say that calling that program awesome is an understatement. I
simply can't think of a better designed piece of software. It is as if
every piece of the program, every line of code or UI ornament was
specifically minted for your satisfaction. True craftsmanship.

I once heard that persian rugs were always created with one deliberate
mistake, since only god was allowed true perfection. Well, there's a
mistake like that in Delicious Library. I tried to buy it for more than
an hour, probably more like two, and it simply wouldn't budge. You can't
buy it through a browser. You have to use its own interface which in my
case simply refused to work.

Finally I gave up and wrote a message about my tribulations that in
hindsight could be more friendly. I've soon received a friendly message
from Mike together with an evaluation license, which allowed me to
produce the list.

I often complain about the way companies treat their customers and it's
really a pleasure to write about an experience like this. Not only do
they produce a remarkable product, they also go all the way when it
comes to helping their customers.

Now I only have to find a way to actually pay for it, since the product
and people behind it more than deserve it.

