Title: Dos and Don'ts of Job Interviews
Date: 2009-09-13 20:16
Author: markos
Category: Company
Slug: dos-and-donts-of-job-interviews

Dear job seeker,

A job opening is an odd thing, because everyone involved is a buyer and
a seller. You are trying to sell yourself to my company while at the
same time I am trying to sell us to you and others we might regrettably
have to turn down this time.

Two months spent actively searching for a new member of our team (we
found him this week) made me reflect on the whole process. I am [not the
only
one](http://friedcellcollective.net/outbreak/2009/08/14/hiring-developers-king-of-the-hill-effect/)
and I sympathize [with
everyone](http://www.worldlandtrust.org/news/2009/07/how-not-to-apply-for-conservation-job.htm)
going through this. In last few years I have read tens if not a hundred
of job applications and interviewed tens of applicants for different
Slovenian IT companies, mainly startups. Not enough to be an expert, but
enough to provide me with a firm opinion that most applications sent
sucked.

That doesn't mean that you personally suck, but I feel comfortable
saying that most of you do not know how to present yourselves well. Mind
you most companies are failing at this too, but this post will be long
enough even as I limit myself to just one side of the story. My intent
is to provide a maximum amount of help with a minimum amount of venting.

I think it is a safe assumption that you sent an application because you
wanted this job. It should also be obvious that we were looking for
someone that we think we'll be able to entrust with challenging tasks
and has a personality that won't turn our jobs into a punishment.

So the question you should pose yourself is: "**What kind of person is
the company looking for and how do I best show to be him?**" (or her)

If you don't know, then look for information until you do. Ask if
necessary, since any company worth working for doesn't mind answering
them. But knowing this is absolutely crucial if you want to be
persuasive and at the same time not needlessly wasting your time on a
company that doesn't fit you. If you still think our company is right
place for you, and I hope you do, then you should make sure that
everything you do when communicating with us tells us that you are THE
person we want to hire.

First and foremost, **read and follow job ad instructions**. Seriously,
you would not believe how many applications fail to follow even most
basic requests. Ask a friend to double check after you if necessary so
you won't miss anything. [Zemanta](http://www.zemanta.com "Zemanta") is
an international company and much of our communication has to be in
English and yet, when we asked for applications to be sent in English,
majority of them weren't.

**If something is unclear, ask for clarification**. Responding to a job
ad is the first test of your ability to receive a task, gather missing
information and perform it to expected (agreed) level. Ignoring
requirements or reinterpreting instructions on your own will make us
doubt you.

Send resume when asked for, but don't think it can substitute things
that were asked for. It is amazing how many people just send their
resume, when ad explicitly said we would like to see examples of work
above everything.

Having said that, resume
([CV](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R%C3%A9sum%C3%A9 "R?sum?")) is
definitely an asset when trying to sell yourself. When you write, keep
in mind that its purpose is to sell you to a company. Put yourself into
my shoes and think what should you write there, that is truthful and
will make me want to hire you.

**Europass resume is something only a bureaucrat could love**. We won't
hold it against you, since somebody probably misinformed you of its
usefulness, but it does tell us almost nothing about you. Even if I knew
all listed companies, I couldn't tell from a job title what you actually
did there.

Much better is to explain in couple of sentences under every job list
item what you achieved there and if necessary why I should care about
this (e.g. *At company ACME I introduced automated testing of Javascript
code that reduced bugs reported by 30%*)

In a fast moving industry like IT there is probably little reason to go
into details about what you did in 1999, unless you are certain it is
still relevant today. I started my career in 1997 porting backup agents
to new UNIX platforms, but nobody would hire me for such work today (and
probably shouldn't then either). Old job listings are mainly used as a
signal for steadfastness.

**Don't embellish resume too much**. It is impossible to impartially
judge your skills and most reviewers expect resumes to be, well,
somewhat too rosy. Still, keep things at least defensible. Think what
would happen if you were invited to an interview and found out that a
part of it is a lie. How much weight do you think the rest of your
resume would carry afterwards? Would you trust integrity of such person?

Considering what I said so far about poor quality of most applications,
you might think it is easy to get to interview, but it is not
necessarily so. There can be external factors that might work against
you so sometimes even otherwise promising candidates have to be turned
down (e.g., it is easier to teach people who live near by).

Let's say now that you were interesting enough that we want to conduct
an interview with you. I think following tips should work well for you
on most occasions. If they don't, count yourself lucky not to work
there. I am not joking.

**Don't bluff.** It's reasonable to assume that I wouldn't ask you a
question I didn't know the answer to so it's unlikely it would work.
Good questions can't be tersely answered so you can't really hide
anyway.

**Admit when you don't know the answer.** True, knowing it would be
better, but at least you are not wasting my time. It's especially
important in small companies that problems are found out as soon as
possible and it is a positive sign that you are a person that we can
trust to let us know about them when there is still time to do
something.

**Don't just give up.** We all encounter problems that we can't solve
and interview questions we don't know answers to. Show initiative and
think out loud how you see the problem and what solutions might be. Give
us a chance to see how you think and persuade us that you are a
tenacious problem solver that won't unnecessarily seek help of others.

**Speak to the point** and **be active**. From my experience this is a
problem more prevalent in Slovenia. It quickly becomes annoying and
tiresome trying to get a direct answer to a question from a person who
doesn't want to give you one. Making me feel like I have to work to keep
interview moving is probably not the best way to leave a good
impression.

**Skills are...needed.** We all want to hire people who fit our needs
perfectly. We rarely can. What happens next depends on company and
people involved, but judging by my experience, we value person over his
skill. If choice comes between a flaky or otherwise non-solid person
with better skills and someone that couples ability to solve problems
and thirst for knowledge with personal integrity and maturity, then it
is likely that latter will be chosen.

**Ask questions.** Inquisitiveness is always a turn on, but interview is
also a chance for you to find more about us. Most companies expect from
you an investment of 8 hours of your life daily and if you are like me,
then it should be important to you what kind of company and people are
you dealing with, what work entails and how do we go about it.
Personally I don't mind questions about salary and benefits, but I do
find it odd if interview starts with them.

Regretfully interview is a last stop for some candidates and we have to
turn them down. I know some companies have a bad habit of turning people
down without letting them know and if that happens to you, well, count
yourself lucky. At Zemanta we find such behavior rude and we notify
everyone. What happens afterwards is usually....nothing. No reply.

My advice to you would be to respond with a note thanking for the
opportunity. It probably won't make a difference in a short run, but it
does leave a good impression. We are all more inclined to recommend (or
hire in next round) people we like.

Good luck!

<div class="zemanta-pixie">

[![Reblog this post [with
Zemanta]](http://img.zemanta.com/reblog_e.png?x-id=37e4a7b1-bb28-45a9-a90c-c3b75ed89041)](http://reblog.zemanta.com/zemified/37e4a7b1-bb28-45a9-a90c-c3b75ed89041/ "Reblog this post [with Zemanta]")<span
class="zem-script paragraph-reblog"></span>
<script src="http://static.zemanta.com/readside/loader.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</span>

</div>
