Title: First look at upcoming WordPress 2.0
Date: 2005-12-20 16:56
Author: markos
Category: UI, Web
Slug: first-look-at-upcoming-wordpress-20

A while ago I wrote a [post](http://markos.gaivo.net/blog/?p=37)
berating [WordPress](http://www.wordpress.org) UI that got more
attention than I wanted. I still stand behind my words, but I'd rather
be known for something else.

Hearing that new WordPress is around the corner, I was eager to write
something more positive. Thanks to
[Shelley](http://weblog.burningbird.net/ "Shelley's blog"), I got a
chance to test new WordPress (WP from now on) and see for myself
improvements they made.

First the good news. WP provides a new WYSIWYG editor
([tinyMCE](http://tinymce.moxiecode.com/)) that certainly makes editing
easier. It does just what you'd expect it to. I also like improved post
preview, which uses *iframe* to show post in real environment, using
theme of the blog. This has been something that really bothered me in
current version, since it makes post preview barely usable. Previews are
also available for themes, so you can see what blog should look like
before you apply the theme.

WP has been â€œajaxified??? and mostly for the better. For example you can
add a new category while editing post. UI has been somewhat simplified
by arranging it in boxes that can be closed or opened according to
user's need. User can also reorder them and since WP remembers their
position and state, it's a fairly effective way to customize UI to
personal needs. Nice. I wish reordering was extended to other lists
(e.g. links), but for all I know, this might be fixed by the time of 2.0
release.

However, my old complaints are still valid. While posts can be edited by
other people of appropriate level, this hasn't been extended to pages.
Not a week passes by in which I wouldn't bump against this limitation.
Theme editor still gives you the same stupid choice between security and
usefulness. User interface is more flexible, but still largely the same
and often overloaded. There's only so much that can be achieved by
hiding stuff in boxes.

Nevertheless, WP 2.0 is a big step forward. Even bigger under the hood
according to what I hear, but since I can't be made to care about PHP,
it's not all that relevant to me. I certainly don't think it sucks
anymore, but I still think it has a far way to go before it will truly
be a friendly tool for everyone.

