Title: First anniversary
Date: 2006-06-13 12:11
Author: markos
Category: Catchall
Slug: first-anniversary

Today is this blog's first anniversary. I posted my first post after I
came back from last year's [@media](http://www.vivabit.com/atmedia/)
conference, which is where I'm going tomorrow. I'm sure it will be even
better than last year, but I somehow don't look forward to it. I got
used to traveling with my wife and lost the lust for going solo.

In this year I wrote 176 posts (not including this one) or almost one
every two days. A lot and certainly too many for them all to be worth
reading. I hope at least some of them have been.

Reliable statistics are a bitch. I installed different packages at
various times, each using their own approach to tracking, which produced
lots of numbers of dubious quality. Still, for the interested few, this
blog has been accessed by more than 12 thousand individuals at least 23
thousand times. Counting all visits including feed update checks, 116
thousand visits resulted in more than 264 thousand generated pages.

Majority of visitors didn't come from Slovenia (only 25.8%), so it was
probably not a stupid idea to write this blog in English even if my
countrymen read above average number of pages per visit.

I'm completely humbled by the amount of time that was spent reading or
scanning this blog, even if each visitor spent only a second on it. I
hope it was worth it and that most of them don't miss that second. I'm
even more amazed that some of you liked it enough to subscribe to it.

Since summaries like this are far more fun to write than to read, I'll
end this one and make it the last. Thanks for stopping by and I hope to
see you again.

