Title: Forgetfulness of online maps
Date: 2007-01-08 19:01
Author: markos
Category: Web
Slug: forgetfulness-of-online-maps

I stumbled upon a [map of
Europe](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:Europe_map_1648.PNG) in the
middle of 17th century while reading about [Jan
Hus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jan_Hus) and [John
Wycliffe](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Wycliffe) and was surprised
to learn how foreign it was to me.

I'm a big fan of Google Earth (and Maps), but the thing that I don't
like is that I can only look at most recent information Google has.
Normally this is what I want, but not always. I like the fact that
[photos](http://maps.google.com/maps?f=q&hl=en&q=ljubljana&ie=UTF8&om=1&z=14&ll=45.762523,14.367714&spn=0.029101,0.083685&t=k&iwloc=addr "Map of Cerknica lake")
of Cerknica lake were taken during one of seasonal droughts, since it
makes it easy to find streams and sinks that are gone when lake is full
of water. But what will happen if new photos will be taken when lake is
full?

Information I can access now will be gone and I'll only be able to wait
for a better luck in the future. Google (and other map providers) have
provided good tools for moving around three dimensions, but I'd like to
be able to move in fourth as well.

Wouldn't it be nice, if you could see how a place is changing through
time or how did states change through centuries?

The problem is not so much technical as it is of information gathering.
Obviously it's getting harder (even impossible) to get reliable data as
you go further back in history, but that's hardly a reason not to try at
all. If you'd be interested in working on map of Europe of last couple
of millennia, please let me know.

**Update**: Wikipedia's
[atlas](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Atlas_of_world_history).

