Title: Gamification of book reading
Date: 2011-05-11 17:15
Author: markos
Category: General development, Web
Slug: gamification-of-book-reading

I've been following subjects of
[gamification](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamification "Gamification")
and [game
mechanics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_mechanics "Game mechanics")
for a couple of years now, but I've only recently spotted how they apply
to me. I conceitedly thought that they have little influence on me, but
reality is as always more nuanced.

I still seem to be unmoved by most attempts. I don't care that my
[LinkedIn](http://www.linkedin.com "LinkedIn") profile is not complete
and no fake mayorship will get me to use
[Foursquare](http://www.foursquare.com/ "Foursquare") until I see some
other tangible benefit. On the other hand keeping a list of books and
having a goal on how many to read has indeed influenced my behavior.

So why did this last example work? Because I actually care about reading
books. It's something I enjoy and want to do more, so "achievements"
actually mean something to me.

I started to track books I read because I wanted to know how many I
actually read, in what order and does that say something about me. I
also thought setting an annual goal would provide a good incentive to
keep reading, which it did, but not exactly in a way I expected.

Having a goal certainly helped me with additional motivation to read
books when otherwise I might not have for one reason or another, but it
also gave me a nudge against dropping books I didn't like since doing so
would mean time invested in them would not get counted to achieving my
goal.

It also pushed me to thinner books. Less pages mean on average quicker
completion. But there are books where six or eight hundred pages doesn't
feel too long and they shouldn't be postponed just because it might take
me more than a couple of weeks to read them.

Time pressure also leads to more cursory reading. I've never been able
to read as deeply as I thought I should, but having a goal definitely
changed my reading for the worse. Again, properly engaging a book takes
more time and hence makes it harder to achieve the goal.

I didn't notice any downsides from having a list itself which has indeed
provided me with insights about me I probably could have if I wrote a
diary. Which I don't, so I'm left to piecing my long term memories
mostly from circumstantial evidence.

That's why I'm keeping a list, but ditching my goal. Upside is simply
not worth the downsides.

I see my experience as providing a lesson. It's relatively easy to go
through different gaming mechanisms and find a combination that you
think will give you results you want. However, incentives are a bitch
and I think it's practically impossible to reliably predict what will
actually happen in use.

That's why complex modern games take so much time to create, because
getting things right takes time and is not something you can reason
through.

I'm with [Kathy Sierra](http://headrush.typepad.com "Kathy Sierra") on
this and you really ought to read [her
comments](http://radar.oreilly.com/2011/04/gamification-purpose-marketing.html#comment-7250008 "Kathy Sierra's comments").
I'm skeptical of general awe around gamification, but I do think game
mechanics will have an important role to play in our future. Still I
would prefer if we cautiously applied new tools where they can't hurt
much before we plaster badges of suck everywhere.

For a while now I've been annoyed by how every gamification talk has
about 20 minutes of gushing of its virtues and about 20 seconds on
possible ethics problems, but my experience has reminded me of the
deeper problem, which is that it is simply much easier to inflict damage
to your users and your product (brand) than getting it right.

<div class="zemanta-pixie">

[![Enhanced by
Zemanta](http://img.zemanta.com/zemified_e.png?x-id=20efb278-1d20-46ec-aeec-c311b50837c7)](http://www.zemanta.com/ "Enhanced by Zemanta")

</div>
