Title: Going home
Date: 2008-07-10 10:02
Author: markos
Category: Python
Slug: going-home

EuroPython 2008 is over. I packed and now I am waiting to leave for the
airport to catch afternoon flight back home. Sadly I don't have time to
attend sprints and since I only recently started to write python again,
I probably wouldn't be of much use anyhow.

Conference itself was great. Smaller than web conferences I usually
attend with a more friendly, homey feeling, but with plenty of excellent
talks where I learned a lot. I also met a bunch of friendly interesting
people and had in general a wonderful time.

It was also interesting to compare the whole experience with other
conferences I go to. Apple is popular, but there are fewer
[Macs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macintosh "Macintosh") than at web
events. [Ubuntu](http://www.ubuntu.com/ "Ubuntu (operating system)")
seems to completely dominate
[Linux](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux "Linux") crowd (me included),
since it was the only distribution I actually have seen and Windows is
in minority. Everyone is much more willing to participate to the point,
where sadly not all who wanted to present a Lightning talk on last day
had the opportunity to do so.

I certainly hope to attend EuroPython 2009, which will be in Birmingham
around this time next year. At the end I also have a present. Yesterday
I got a license for [Wing IDE](http://www.wingware.com "Wing IDE")
Professional and since I don't need one, I'll give it to the first
person who expresses a wish to have it in comments and leaves his/her
email address in relevant part of comment form.

**Update**: License is gone, sent to a new owner.

<div class="zemanta-pixie" style="margin-top: 10px; height: 15px;">

[![Zemanta
Pixie](http://img.zemanta.com/reblog_e.png?x-id=a6262891-3f96-4b97-8bf6-949cb83cba0e)](http://reblog.zemanta.com/zemified/a6262891-3f96-4b97-8bf6-949cb83cba0e/ "Zemified by Zemanta")

</div>
