Title: Happy holidays
Date: 2005-12-27 08:24
Author: markos
Category: Catchall, Web
Slug: happy-holidays

In a few hours I'll be going on a trip to Stockholm, so this is probably
the last post of this year. It also happens to be the 100th post since
it was started six months ago, making it a perfect place to recapitulate
this year and this blog.

It has become a custom by now to flood web with such articles at this
time of the year, so I've decided to limit mine to a much less talked
topic, a state of web in Slovenia.

It's certainly been an interesting year. We've experienced a rise of web
standards [based](http://www.siol.net/)
[designs](http://www.bof.si/main.cp2) and even got [first slovenian AJAX
application](http://rkg.gov.si/GERK/) intended for wide use. Truth be
told, I don't really know when it was launched, since I more or less
stumbled upon it, but it seems that until this year, most of my
colleagues weren't aware of it either. Also it's the year when feeds
started to appear on prominent websites (with most of the public
blissfully ignorant of them).

Sadly, it's still safe to say that most new designs were done with
table-based layouts and many table-less left much to be desired. Most of
them are abusing or flatly ignoring semantic part of HTML tags and
drowning in superfluous div's. Little thought is spent on usability and
even less on accessibility of new sites.

As customary by now, we seem to be lagging at least a couple of years
behind the world. Slovenian web of 2005 is still very much the web of
closed gardens. Feeds may have appeared, but their shy use is limited
and there are few if any public APIs for developers to use.

I expect this will change in new year with public launch of
[Marela](http://www.marela.si) and hopefully other new services. Still,
we're not pioneers and it seems we don't want to be.

On a personal front, it's been a very busy, but also a very good year
for me. Our service is about to go from a closed beta to more open one
and first signs from our users are very positive. We started [a
series](http://web.zen.si) of web related talks through which I met
many, from whom I've learned a lot. There's more talent out there than I
was aware of and it certainly gave me hope for the future.

I discovered the fun of writing and had a good fortune of having
insightful readers who helped me tame my ignorance at least a bit. There
were more of you reading this blog than I probably deserve and certainly
many more than I've ever expected. I'm grateful to you all.

So to end this all, what are my blog resolutions for the new year?

I wrote more frequently than I first expected and probably should. In
new year I'll try to reduce the number of posts in favor of more useful
content and prose that doesn't feel like chewing cardboard.

I'll try to write shorter posts except when content actually demands a
longer one. I'd also like to hear what my readers would like to see more
or less of so if you can spare a moment or two, please drop me a line in
the comments.

I wish everyone all the best in new year.

