Title: IE6 - hope of web standards
Date: 2009-01-20 20:49
Author: markos
Category: General development, Web
Slug: ie6-hope-of-web-standards

I often find myself in a room with web developers and at least one of
them proclaiming that IE6 sucks because it doesn't support web standards
while others nod in agreement.

This has bothered me enough to contemplate having a talk at [BarCamp
Ljubljana](http://www.barcamp.si/). I didn't, but this is what I would
say.

[Internet Explorer
6](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Explorer_6 "Internet Explorer 6")
was released on 27th August 2001, when twin towers were still standing
in NY.

7 years is a long time to remember, but what did we work with back then?
There was no
[Safari](http://www.apple.com/safari/ "Safari (web browser)") and
Firefox was still in its infacy, far from 1.0 release coming 3 years
later. It was changing so often most developers simply ignored it. Opera
was at version 5 (version 6 came out in November of that year) and I am
sure I am not alone in remembering how awful it was at least until
version 7 in 2003. [Mozilla](http://mozilla.com "Mozilla") was at
version 0.6 and although showing great promise, IE6 definitely was the
browser we hoped others would match.

Back then no browser supported CSS2 in a meaningful capacity. Opera had
the best support for CSS until then, but IE6 surpassed it. It didn't
support DOM Level 2, which was standardized only 4 months before first
beta of IE6. Good excuse not available anymore to
[IE7](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Explorer_7 "Internet Explorer 7")
and IE8. Apart from that it supported more or less everything web
developer could want back then and then some. IE6 problem isn't so much
that it didn't support standards of its time as it is that it doesn't
support standards of today.

So why the hostility?

[Lancia Delta
Integrale](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lancia_Delta "Lancia Delta"),
which dominated rally competitions in eighties, is today an obsolete
car, but car aficionados still have a soft sport for it. You don't hear
them go around complaining how it doesn't meet standards of todays cars.

Well, as I've said, 7 years is a long time and most web developers are
not old gits like me, so the historic context isn't there. We also have
to live with its real shortcomings today. But I think there's more to
this.

Complaining about IE6 standards deficiencies is declaring who you are
and where you stand. It's a simple and very recognizable way of
declaring you are a member of web-standards tribe. IE6 bitching has at
least as much to do with proclaimer as with proclamation's subject.
Trashing IE6 isn't so much talking about the browser as it is talking
about you.

However it is not unreasonable to ask why IE6 doesn't better support
standards that were released or updated after its initial release.

Certainly more could be done through software updates, but are standards
themselves forward looking in a way that would avoid updating browser
internals with every new version of a particular standard?

I am quite certain that this isn't always possible. I don't see how you
could add a video object from
[HTML5](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTML_5 "HTML 5") to a browser
without explicit support from browser's developers. But not all changes
are such as [John
Allsopp](http://www.alistapart.com/articles/semanticsinhtml5) has
recently pointed out.

I have mixed feelings about HTML5. It's bringing much needed new
capabilities and lots of goodies, but I also think [Sam
Ruby](http://intertwingly.net/blog/2009/01/15/Grandiosity) has a point.
New, simple,
[DOCTYPE](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Document_Type_Declaration "Document Type Declaration")
is reduced to a switch between standards and [quirks
mode](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quirks_mode "Quirks mode") and unless
it will become more complicated in later revisions, it won't offer an
easy way to distinguish between HTML5 documents and other HTML versions.
This isn't a particular problem if newer revisions will be backwards
compatible with older, but this isn't true even of HTML5. Why would we
think this is the last version where we will make a major misstep that
needs backwards-incompatible correction?

There are other things I don't like about HTML5, but if I would have to
pick one thing I would like to see changed, is to make it more
extendable.

To sum it up, IE6 is indeed a problem in todays development, but it's
also at least at fault for this. It was an excellent browser when it
came out and is remarkably solid one for software so old. There are many
reasons, completely untouched in this post, why its users don't migrate
to something newer, but we, web developers, are also to blame, because
we tend to standardize only current practice and leave few doors open
for future development which invariably comes.

<div class="zemanta-pixie">

[![Reblog this post [with
Zemanta]](http://img.zemanta.com/reblog_e.png?x-id=1235c7ef-00b0-4968-aaa8-90dfe88b2f35)](http://reblog.zemanta.com/zemified/1235c7ef-00b0-4968-aaa8-90dfe88b2f35/ "Zemified by Zemanta")

</div>
