Title: Imbecile ad messages
Date: 2005-11-18 23:43
Author: markos
Category: Company
Slug: imbecile-ad-messages

I spent a good part of last year studying things like marketing, pricing
and so on, which are completely untechnical in nature, but very much
essential for a success of any company. I'm far from being an expert in
any of these fields, but every now and then I come across an example,
that leaves me dumbfounded in its amazing stupidity. It seems like
incompetence is limitless and some people receive quite a lot of money
to show off theirs.

Practically every textbook I've read taught me that the basic approach
to marketing is to have a clear message of what you're offering and why
this is beneficial to people you're selling to. With enough repetition
you might have a chance of making them remember you. I certainly don't
think this is the only way to do it, but it's probably the most tried
and tested method out there.

Well, there's a new fashion in Slovenia. Create ads that don't tell you
anything. I'm not thinking of weird ads that don't seem to have anything
to do with a company or product they're pushing. No, I mean ads with
literally nothing on except a word like [IZI](http://www.izimobil.si)
(bastardized easy) or [T-2](http://www.t-2.net). I guess it might have
been intriguing if it wasn't so overused.

However, last example with izi really takes the cake. First there were
ads showing either just izi or if you were lucky, also a link to
[naizi.si](http://www.naizi.si). As already mentioned, they were ads for
[izimobil](http://www.izimobil.si). Now, go look at the
[site](http://www.naizi.si) and find anything that could point a visitor
to [izimobil.si](http://www.izimobil.si).

I'll buy you a beer, if you can do it in next 24 hours. Or any other
beverage of your choice.

Back? I couldn't do it either. It's hard to imagine there isn't one, but
it's certainly well hidden. 'cause you know, people really want to dig
around the site looking for what you're about, right?

Their ad campaign has been expanded in last day or so as they came out
with jumbo ads promoting izimobil more directly and they're trying to do
so with a slogan:

**"Prvi slovenski virtualni operater mobilne telefonije."**

Or in English: **"First slovenian virtual mobile operator."**

Say what?

Was that supposed to persuade me to do something? Does virtual mean
they're not real? Which part should register as something positive with
me?

Apart from being almost meaningless, it's also wrong, if being virtual
alludes to using some [other company's](http://www.mobitel.si) mobile
network. [Debitel](http://www.debitel.si/) did it first, although not as
a prepaid operator and I know of no one, who would find that fact alone
appealing.

I'm not saying their ad campaign won't have positive effects. Hell, you
can get them by showing dancing bananas and pie fights, as long as
you're willing to spend enough money on it. But somehow I doubt it's an
economical way to market your product.

