Title: Making peanut butter
Date: 2009-11-08 21:00
Author: markos
Category: Javascript
Slug: making-peanut-butter

[Rok](http://sadrooftops.wordpress.com/ "Rok's blog") requested a post
about making [peanut
butter](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peanut_butter "Peanut butter") and
since he does such a stellar job taking care of technical side of [wwwh
talks](http://web.zen.si/ "wwwh homepage"), I thought it would only be
fair to grant his wish. My butter looks like this:

![Peanut butter on a slice of
bread](http://static.marela.si/users0/markos/3/oJO6QdbUC6XJcZNqv-CJzcg1JlI.jpg)

If this doesn't look to you like the best peanut butter ever, look
again. And again.

Before I go on describing how I make peanut butter, let me spend a
moment or two talking about why. After all it can be bought in
practically any grocery store in Slovenia and visiting a few will even
give you a limited selection. My first reason was to limit my intake.
Peanut butter is incredibly delicious, but not exactly healthy and since
I noticed that how much I eat is proportional to amount available, I
wanted to avoid 350g jars that would be the death of me. My second
reason was to have a better control of what goes in it. Like with
sausages you can't really tell what was used and in what condition it
was. I certainly didn't want to eat hydrogenated fat <span
id="pbutter-1-back">[^[1]^](#pbutter-1 "Link to first footnote")</span>
added to your stock? peanut butter and were suspicious of a thick layer
of oil on top of organic ones too. When I got better at making it, I
also found out I really dislike bought ones.

As it happens the only thing that is absolutely necessary to make peanut
butter are peanuts themselves. However you will probably want to use
some oil, a sweetener like sugar or [maple
syrup](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maple_syrup "Maple syrup") and salt.

I use roasted peanuts. You can buy already roasted (but unsalted) or
roast them yourself. To do that you heat up your oven to 175? C and put
them in until they are done to your liking. Turn them around every
couple of minutes so they don't get burned. Next step: chopping.

But first a side note to all my American friends. Reports that
Slovenians don't eat peanut butter are simply false. We just hide it
well. It's kind of like masonry, but instead of discreet regalia and a
secret handshake, we, peanut butter connoisseurs, recognize each other
by a subtle nutty odor and small brownish stains in corners of lips.
Slightly crazy and distracted look in presence of a peanut butter jar
might also be a hint.

So, chopping. For small amounts, 200g or less, I use a hand blender with
chopper accessory. I also use it because it's the only blender I own. It
tends to overheat and since I melted its predecessor my chopping amounts
to mostly waiting pierced with short chopping episodes. Bigger blenders
are certainly more resilient, but they also tend to have their blades
raised higher from the bottom which makes them unpractical for chopping
small amounts of nuts. Spend enough time doing this and dust will turn
into a fudge-like paste. Do it more and it will become more liquid. If
you like to spread butter thick, it might be even liquid enough.

I don't so I add a bit of oil. I use [peanut
oil](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peanut_oil "Peanut oil"), but any
edible with neutral flavor will work fine, just don't add too much. You
can always add more if you find butter too thick, but it is difficult to
correct too liquid one. I add about a tablespoon of oil for 200g of
peanuts while they are still pulverized and rarely need to add more
later.

On recent vacation in Nepal I also tried their peanut butter. It tastes
very much like ours at this stage; right taste but like most food in
Nepal not salty enough for western taste.

Salt is not the only thing missing. Peanut butter is like tomato sauce,
it needs a bit of sugar to get a more well rounded flavor. I used
powdered sugar with some success, but maple syrup recently won me over
(a tip from
[Ale?](http://twitter.com/alesspetic "Ale? ?peti? on twitter") whose
many culinary talents include baking [great
cakes](http://tweetphoto.com/cxyahdo1 "Pumpkin cake")). How much salt
and sugar to use is again down to personal preference. I use about 1-2
teaspoons of maple syrup and slowly salt while mixing until I am
satisfied with result. Blender warms butter and spoils tasting somewhat,
so I stop spicing butter when it is a bit less sweet and slightly more
salted then I would prefer. This results in just the right taste when
cooled.

That's it. You should now have peanut butter good enough for gods. A few
tries, to find the right balance between ingredients and you will end up
with one fit for you too. It took me longer because I also eat it with
spoon, hence it's easier to notice its mistakes and more difficult to
balance different uses (I prefer more salty butter on bread).

My next goal: cashews and cocoa spread.

<span
id="pbutter-1">[[1]](#pbutter-1-back "Jump back to reference")</span>
Hydrogenated fat is used for the same reason as oil, to make butter
easier to spread. Added oil doesn't actually react with peanuts and if
you leave your butter long enough, it will eventually separate and form
that unwanted oily layer on top.
[Hydrogenation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrogenation "Hydrogenation")
solidifes fat and prevents that from happening. Downside is that you
can't tell how much additional fat was added unless it is specified in
ingredients list and it's even more unhealthy.

<div class="zemanta-pixie">

[![Reblog this post [with
Zemanta]](http://img.zemanta.com/reblog_e.png?x-id=56473c29-9ebd-4f4f-809b-b65d0684bc36)](http://reblog.zemanta.com/zemified/56473c29-9ebd-4f4f-809b-b65d0684bc36/ "Reblog this post [with Zemanta]")<span
class="zem-script paragraph-reblog"></span>
<script src="http://static.zemanta.com/readside/loader.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</span>

</div>
