Title: N900 applications I miss
Date: 2010-03-09 13:24
Author: markos
Category: Catchall, General development, Python, Web
Slug: n900-applications-i-miss

I love using [N900](http://maemo.nokia.com/n900/ "N900"), but there are
applications or features I miss. This post is a reminder to me on what I
might do if I find more time. Since list is too long for me to do
everything (unless I suddenly win lottery), feel free to pick an idea
you like and run with it. Just let me know afterwards where I can see
results of your work or participate in development.

**Offline Wikipedia.** When I am not behind a computer or reading, I
like to be outdoors and even though cheap always available Internet was
supposed to be here any day now, I regularly find myself information
hungry in places with a very slow or no Internet connection. N900 with
SD card could pretty much store everything I wanted and building an app
that process and display information from [Wikipedia
dumps](http://download.wikimedia.org/ "Wikipedia dumps starting page")
doesn't look like a too difficult task.

**Better dictionary for Maemo.** QStarDict port is great and it has
become one of my favorite applications. However its user interface
suffers from being a direct port of a desktop version one and could be
improved with one that wastes less space and is orientation aware.
Reading dictionary is one of few things I wish I could do in portrait
mode.

**Web platform for Maemo.** Wouldn't it be great if you could build
Maemo applications with web technologies?
[QtWebKit](http://qt.nokia.com/doc/4.6/qtwebkit.html "Link to QtWebKit documentation")
is a great place to start and I am certain I could expose new
functionality through *addToJavascriptWindowObject* of
[QWebFrame](http://qt.nokia.com/doc/4.6/qwebframe.html "Link to QWebFrame documentation")
class. Beside exposing this stuff I would also like to create tools and
interfaces for developers and users alike with which they can easily
package a web application as a standalone Maemo application or in case
of users, turn a website into an application (I know you can add a
bookmark to a website but it is not quite the same thing).

**[Caffeine](http://lightheadsw.com/caffeine/ "Caffeine for Mac") for
N900.** I would like to pick *"Switch profile to silent for \<x time\>"*
and know N900 will turn back normal profile when that time period
expires. I always forget to turn ringing back on after I leave cinema.

**Monitor unknown calls.** I don't want to pollute my address book with
every phone number under the sun, but I would appreciate if I could get
a hint if I ever talked or called the number in question. Bonus points
for using public phone books to fetch name for given number and parsing
number for clues (which country or part of it is call coming from).

This is not a complete list of things I want, but rest are mostly
feature requests (except email client which currently really kind of
sucks). For example I wish calendar had support for
[CalDAV](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CalDAV "CalDAV") or PDF viewer for
screen rotate, search and fit to width.

I am aware that Maemo should be called MeeGo now, but a habit of years
can't be changed in few weeks. I searched for above applications and
didn't find them, but if you know of any I missed, then please let me
know.

<div class="zemanta-pixie">

[![Reblog this post [with
Zemanta]](http://img.zemanta.com/reblog_e.png?x-id=8a3f246d-6a49-416b-b38b-3c79f3c30764)](http://reblog.zemanta.com/zemified/8a3f246d-6a49-416b-b38b-3c79f3c30764/ "Reblog this post [with Zemanta]")

</div>
