Title: Namibia
Date: 2008-10-12 00:10
Author: markos
Category: Catchall
Slug: namibia

I'm back from much needed and very appreciated vacation, which I didn't
publicize in advance in an old-fashioned hope not to give tips to
burglars. Sensible or not, we still have our stuff.

There are places where I've been, places where I wouldn't like to go
again and places like
[Namibia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Namibia "Namibia"), where you ask
yourself, how many times will you make it back before you die. Many
eloquent people have tried to describe appeal of this beautiful country
and its fantastic people, so I won't even try where so many have failed
before, but if you have a chance to visit, you really shouldn't miss it.

I did see something I would like to see replicated here in Slovenia.
Every government car in Namibia has a green registration plate with 3
letters that either describe part of the government it belongs to, or
have GRN as a catchall category. Here, only police and defense forced
have their own plates, but it would be really great if every car bought
by state would have a plate that would clearly mark to which department
it belongs. This way taxpayers could get an impression on how many cars
out there are paid by them and what kind. More transparency can only be
good.

In other news I will be giving a talk at Web 2.0 Expo in
[Berlin](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berlin "Berlin") on 23rd titled
"Easy Deployment of Site-Extensions with a Browser Plugin". If Berlin is
too far, then you can also hear it this coming Wednesday at 19.00 in
Kiberpipa at our regular Spletne urice talks.

<div class="zemanta-pixie">

[![Reblog this post [with
Zemanta]](http://img.zemanta.com/reblog_e.png?x-id=2dd1eb7f-f857-4078-a9bb-3a79a9030152)](http://reblog.zemanta.com/zemified/2dd1eb7f-f857-4078-a9bb-3a79a9030152/ "Zemified by Zemanta")

</div>
