Title: One small step
Date: 2009-07-20 22:46
Author: markos
Category: Company
Slug: one-small-step

Today? or tomorrow, depending on where you happen to live, is 40 years
since [Neil
Armstrong](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neil_Armstrong "Neil Armstrong")
became first among few who stepped on moon. When I was a kid, there was
nothing I wanted more than becoming an astronaut. Closest I ever got to
this dream was having fun at [Euro Space
Center](http://www.eurospacecenter.be/envisit.htm "Euro Space Center").

I don't regret this, because I have a great job. It still feels a
privilege to work at [Zemanta](http://www.zemanta.com "Zemanta") and
that is why I'm happy to say that [we are looking for a frontend
developer](http://www.zemanta.com/jobs/ "Job ad") to strengthen our
team.

We are searching for someone well versed with Javascript in modern
browsers that wants to learn and we can learn from. Working in startup
requires ability in having fun with unexpected challenges, but does not
mean you will be overworked. We believe that rested developers are more
creative and productive and practice what we believe in. In exchange
we'll try to be as flexible as possible to meet your (other) needs.

So, if you are a developer with even an inkling of a wish to work in a
company like ours, please consider
[applying](http://www.zemanta.com/jobs/ "Job ad"). You can also leave
any question you might have in comments and I'll try to answer it to the
best of my abilities.

<div class="zemanta-pixie" style="margin-top: 10px; height: 15px;">

[![Reblog this post [with
Zemanta]](http://img.zemanta.com/reblog_e.png?x-id=776f1526-aafa-4206-9966-4658717c9e0e)](http://reblog.zemanta.com/zemified/776f1526-aafa-4206-9966-4658717c9e0e/ "Reblog this post [with Zemanta]")

</div>
