Title: Our stuff sucks
Date: 2005-08-05 20:35
Author: markos
Category: General development
Slug: our-stuff-sucks

When I started my company with a friend two years ago, I had many plans
for it and myself. One of them was to make interesting, innovative
stuff. Hard problems others weren't tackling or we thought we could do
better.

A year and a half ago we started to work on what is slowly, but clearly
becoming Marela (which should see light of the day this autumn). It's
interesting how you start working on one clear idea and with each week
that passes, your idea and your view change a bit until after a while,
they are very much different from what you set out to do. Same passions,
same goals, but quite a different result.

What really changed in last year is what I personally want to do. I'd
still like to do things that nobody has done yet, but more important now
is to take ideas from others and try to make them more accessible,
easier to comprehend and use. I've noticed that most of my innovating
these days, as much as it happens, is directed toward these goals.

Lately I've been having awful time using stuff made by Apple. Ipod
refuses to wake up from sleep without reboot, Powerbook added broken
Superdrive to random freezes and new iMac seems to find ever new ways to
annoy me. So I've spent a good amount of time last week to recover
pictures from last vacation and fix other random iPhoto quirks and while
I was doing that, a wonderful thing happened.

Something shifted in my head and for a while I could see clearly how
computers look to people, who unlike me haven't spent a better part of
two decades behind a keyboard, but use them with the same understanding
and confidence as I can use lathe.

God, it's awful how much crap we produced and still produce. I've never
seen so much wisdom in Jacob Nielsen's words as in those moments. Gray
backgrounds with blue links and black text might be dull, but you
certainly don't have to guess a lot on what to click after you've seen
one such page.

Luckily the insight isn't completely gone, but I wish I'd keep more of
it. I'm not saying we should abandon everything and return to bleak
past, especially since the problem is self correcting one, but I do feel
impelled to make my work more accessible to more people.

In a way, I think there's a dilemma of who you want to reach. I believe
younger generations don't and won't have problems with most of the
things designers and programmers come up since computers and technology
have always been a large part of their lives. However, in general, it's
a bigger problem for those, who haven't picked up idioms of computer
user interfaces young enough.

Personally, I think making things easier for later makes it easier for
former too and therefore a reasonable goal to pursue.

