Title: Ownership
Date: 2012-12-26 14:40
Author: markos
Category: Catchall, Web
Slug: ownership

As a person with a somewhat unusual fondness for measuring and modelling
my own behavior I should be a happy buyer of
[gadgets](https://jawbone.com/up "Jawbone's UP") for [collecting
data](http://www.fitbit.com/one "Fitbit") about myself and my
environment. Yet so far I bought none, because they don't seem to work
*well* without (occasional) data sync with producer's servers.

I really shouldn't have to explain privacy standpoint of this.
Describing my life and immediate environment in detail to a bunch of
people I have never met, some of whom don't even work for the company
yet and trusting all of them that they will not compromise it for as
long as they will keep it is to me self-evidently moronic.

But I also avoid such hardware even when data in question might not be
particularly sensitive. If I am paying for something to be manufactured,
then I expect to own it. If a gadget depends on an external service to
be useful, then I am really only leasing it. Services disappear for many
reasons and it doesn't make much sense to rely on their availability
unless you can host them yourself. I loath ads, but paying for a service
is not a guarantee for its continuing presence either.

I am not against functionality that reasonably requires at least
occasional connection to grid. Most social features probably do.
Products like phones don't even make sense without network. Web
interfaces certainly do make these devices cheaper and more quickly
evolving. So there are certainly good reasons beyond roping you in to
make them partially off-loaded on web.

However I don't want to use those features and I certainly don't want to
give up data I care about for features I don't. What I expect from
devices I buy is my control of data and purchased functionality without
others meddling or peeking over my shoulders.

