Title: Personal Data Protection
Date: 2005-11-10 10:44
Author: markos
Category: Company
Slug: personal-data-protection

One of the downsides of running your own company is that you have to get
familiar with things you could never care for and amazingly often make
sense only to really twisted bureaucratic minds.

In Slovenia, if you collect personal information of any kind, you have
to register such database 15 days before its first use with
[Inspectorate for Personal Data
Protection](http://www.mp.gov.si/index.php?id=2243&L=1). I'm all in
favor of laws protecting personal information and in general I think
Slovenian laws are not too bad in that regard. But if inspectorate by
their [own
words](http://www.mp.gov.si/fileadmin/mp.gov.si/pageuploads/2005/PDF/porocila/poroc_ivop_2004.pdf)
rarely inspects cases that weren't reported to them and all such
inspections seem to be limited to state institutions, what good is such
register than anyway? How does it protect anyone?

You can read online [a
list](http://www2.gov.si/mp/katalogz.nsf/(wwwUpravljavci)?OpenView&Count=30 "Online register")
of companies that registered their databases together with a short
summary of what kind of data they collect and what for. I've checked a
company where I administered such database for two and a half years
(never experienced an inspection of any kind) and it's quite clear that
no one actually checks if provided information is true or complete.

What you're left with is another meaningless obligation you have to
fulfill. Preferably by sending them email with data AND a printed form
(email only is not allowed). Nice. You can do more work so they don't
have to.

E-government Slovenian style.

