Title: Pimping my notebook
Date: 2011-11-06 19:41
Author: markos
Category: Catchall
Slug: pimping-my-notebook

I do practically all of my work on Sony VAIO notebook I bought 3 years
ago. I picked it because it was very light (less than 1.5kg), small, had
great screen, keyboard and battery that seemed to last forever (around
11 hours without WiFi and about 8 with it). I still love this machine,
but it has a remarkable design failure. Let's see if you can spot it on
this picture?

![Detail of Sony VAIO showing power on/off
switch](http://markos.gaivo.net/images/switch.jpg "Power on/off switch")

That glassy looking button is an on/off switch. It responds to light
pressure and it protrudes from notebook even when lid is closed. What
could possibly go wrong?

After a while I got tired of my notebook getting turned off while I
carried it and made what I believed would be a temporary fix until I
figure out something better ^<span
id="pimp-notebook-1">[[1]](#pimp-notebook-1-note)</span>^. A cap for
button made out of layers of paper for sturdiness (I should at least use
paperboard) glued together and reinforced with copious amounts of Scotch
tape. It looked ugly, but mostly worked.

The problem with temporary fixes is that they tend to become permanent.
I think this happens when they are too successful and remove too much
pain, but it's hard to find that sweet spot of enough uneasiness without
actual aggravation. Maybe it doesn't even exist.

So I've been using it ever since with a firm intention to figure out a
better way to fix it. I finally decided to draw what I need and print it
at [Shapeways](http://www.shapeways.com "Shapeways") ^<span
id="pimp-notebook-2">[[2]](#pimp-notebook-2-note)</span>^. Here are
results:

![3 switch protectors. Old one made out of paper and two new
ones.](http://markos.gaivo.net/images/protectors.jpg "Switch protectors - old and new")

I made two (left is old paper one), because it takes them a while to
print and deliver them to Europe, I had no experience with materials and
they are relatively cheap. They also looked better before I sandpapered
them somewhat for a better fit. In fact both of them were completely
black.

A couple of tips if you intend to use
[SketchUp](http://sketchup.google.com/ "Google SketchUp") for drawing
models. SketchUp was really made for drawing sketches of buildings so
when you start it, you'll see an image of a person (to help you scale
your sketch). That image is an object and you have to delete it if you
don't want it to screw up your measurements in exported file. The other
consequence of SketchUp purpose is that anything you draw has no depth.
This didn't matter to me since required thickness of protector cylinder
was about the same as minimum thickness that 3D printer can print. If
this is not true for you, then you'll probably need to do some
post-processing (search Shapeways for tutorials).

My notebook has been "on the road" and has performed admirably apart
from a failed battery latch which forced me to now use a lower capacity
battery (which still gets me through a typical conference day). But 3
years is forever for wandering notebook so it was no big surprise that
frame of its screen eventually cracked. Superglue didn't fix it and I
was thinking about gluing a piece of wood or metal to screen for
reinforcement, but I hate the idea of additional weight. It would also
look awful.

At about same time I was snooping around [Mozilla
store](http://store.mozilla.org/) to see if there was something I like
which I could buy to support my favorite web project and discovered
laptop skins. I was never a fan of covering my laptop with stickers from
various startups (why would anyone want that?), but this was perfect.
I'm not sure from what kind of material the skins are made of, but they
are thin and don't tear easily. With another layer of Scotch tape I got
something that I think looks great and provides enough protection for a
now more careful user:

![Shows back of notebook with new skin and switch protector
attached.](http://markos.gaivo.net/images/final.jpg "New back of notebook and switch protector")

Looks great, right?

1.  <div id="pimp-notebook-1-note">

    </div>

    I still find it amazing that this problem wasn't caught before
    release.  Eventually they noticed it and later models got buttons
    that need more pressure to trigger and are better shielded from
    environment. [↩](#pimp-notebook-1)
2.  <div id="pimp-notebook-2-note">

    </div>

    I knew about [3D
    printing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/3D_printing "3D printing")
    and company for years. Who knows why I didn't think of using it
    sooner. [↩](#pimp-notebook-2)

