Title: Quo vadis, Nokia
Date: 2009-01-27 17:06
Author: markos
Category: Catchall
Slug: quo-vadis-nokia

It's been a month since I got an [iPod
touch](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPod_Touch "IPod Touch") as a
present and I've been using it regularly since. I still have and use
both a [Nokia](http://nokia.com "Nokia") N65 phone and [Nokia N770
tablet](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nokia_770_Internet_Tablet), but use
of later has been diminished in last month.

**iPod touch experience**

I can't help not to think of Touch as basically this decade's Palm
organizer. Thin widget with pleasant user experience that can be
extended with myriad of applications, whose developers are -- judging by
iPhone versions -- limited not by their imagination, but with device
capabilities and limited expandability.

I still don't like its on-screen keyboard and wish I had at least
something like
[Graffiti](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graffiti_(Palm_OS)). Hence I
don't write on it anything longer than two sentences and together with
lack of camera, built-in microphone, GPS, Bluetooth or even just
self-made software, it makes Touch a read-mainly device. Consumer device
would be another, more ghastly, but appropriate description.

As a side note, even my now aged N770 tablet is more friendly to
creators and hence I still find use for it. I just don't want to browse
web on it because of its very very dated browser that can't be updated.

Still, even with annoying limitations I like iPod touch a lot. It's hard
not to with its polished interface and an [App
Store](http://www.apple.com/iphone/appstore/ "App Store") that is
probably its killer application. Choice of applications in Slovenia is
more limited than in USA, but still very wide and downloading them is so
easy and cheap, you might have to fight against developing an addiction
to it.

**So what about Nokia?**

Mobile devices space has become really interesting in last year. iPhone,
iPod touch, Android with G1 and upcoming Palm Pre are finally bringing
experience on web and otherwise, that we were promised years ago. But
what this list lacks is any gadgets from Nokia.

I like Nokia. They had friendliest phones that are remarkably open in
industry that likes to control everything. I think their tablets are
great, even with shortcomings that should be resolved by now. But even
with lots of innovation I get an impression that they are lagging
behind.

As a complete outsider who only passingly follows what is happening in
mobile industry, I can only ignorantly speculate about its reasons and
plans.

I believe first problem for Nokia is that unlike
[Palm](http://www.palm.com/), [Apple](http://www.apple.com "Apple") or
even [Google](http://google.com "Google") it's not a niche player and
tries to build phone for every possible user. It releases them too
often. Taken together it is no wonder that just Nokia Europe
[lists](http://europe.nokia.com/find-products) 115 devices that are
either selling now, were recently or will be in near future.

That's too many devices, each with slightly different software, that
create a very fragmented market. In such environment you can't really
hope that application would be pushing phones capabilities which aren't
there in most cases. Hence applications Nokia offers are not nearly as
exciting as what Apple has.

Next problem presents development environment, which is simply awful.
[Symbian](http://www.symbian.com "Symbian") might have been a nice
platform back when, but its time has passed and I doubt open-sourcing it
will help. Java hardly works better, but it's probably a bit nicer to
use even though it feels slower. Python is nice for tinkering, but not
really an option until it becomes pre-installed. There's also a web
runtime, which is mostly missing. Few phones support it and only one
phone available can use it for something more significant than a window
to web.

Much of what I just said is not true for tablets, but historically they
didn't seem to get much love from company. Too bad, since I think they
are one of the most exiciting things Nokia has.

I do remain an optimist. Purchase and relicensing of
[Qt](http://trolltech.com/products/qt/ "Qt (toolkit)") together with its
upcoming S60 version signals that company is aware of development
problems. Qt also offers a possibility of a framework that could be used
everywhere and hopefully this will include Fremantle. Generally I don't
put too much faith in rumors, but some of them give credible hints that
next tablet could be even better than an already great N810. If it also
brings a distribution model comparable to App Store and a bit more
polish, then it could be a big success even with non-geeks.

But what they need to do in my opinion is spend less time trying to
build all encompassing services like [Ovi](http://www.ovi.com/) and
spend more effort in building amazing devices that integrate well with
what is already out there. And by integration I don't mean an app hidden
in some folder on phone. Upload to [Flickr](http://www.flickr.com/)
should be available right after you took a photo. I also wish they
didn't try to leverage existing platform and users so much and were more
daring and forward looking. If platform you have is stopping you from
developing a phone you want, then find or develop a better one.

Until then I am sticking with what I got. A great phone for my needs
that few match and a couple of nice tablets.

<div class="zemanta-pixie">

[![Reblog this post [with
Zemanta]](http://img.zemanta.com/reblog_e.png?x-id=3f624094-c249-4865-a24b-46afa4ad183f)](http://reblog.zemanta.com/zemified/3f624094-c249-4865-a24b-46afa4ad183f/ "Zemified by Zemanta")

</div>
