Title: Reading sources
Date: 2011-11-21 11:37
Author: markos
Category: General development, Web
Slug: reading-sources

Google Reader was redesigned lately and I've been annoyed ever since. I
had a dubious privilege of cutting and changing product features people
loved in pursuit of ~~higher~~ different goals, so I try to be
understanding when others do the same. I mostly found clumsy workarounds
for removed features, but I do wish I could at least still trust that
list of unread items actually has *all of them*. On a positive note I
can save some electricity now because copious amounts of "helpfully"
white whitespace illuminate this room brightly enough that you wouldn't
sit naked in-front of your computer even with lights turned off. That is
if you are the sort of person who likes doing that but stops short of
flashing your neighbors.

I still strongly dislike changes made, but I continue using Google
Reader, because crack-heads don't give up dope just because it was cut
too thinly. I cherish my list of reading sources and like a gardener I
have been cultivating it through years because I believe they make me
better informed than I would be if I relied only on links shared by
others. This may be elitist, but it is also true.

We are biased when choosing friends and communities we belong to. At the
very least we enjoy our life more when surrounded with like minded
people which is really a lighter shade of group think. We share to tell
stories as much about what is shared as we do about who we are. Even
when not self-censoring or trying to project an image we still are
horribly bad at evaluating what influences us and how. Sharing
everything, as [this idiotic
article](http://techcrunch.com/2011/11/19/curation-through-unsharing/)
suggests, doesn't fix this ^<span
id="reading-sources-1">[[1]](#reading-sources-note-1)</span>^. It's
still content from same people only more of it.

Then there are social new sites, which are in essence news organizations
with bigger editorial board. Their focus might not be the same and their
world view less obvious (or not) as of traditional boards, but the end
result really isn't all that different. I don't dread waking up in a
world without [Apple](http://www.apple.com "Apple's homepage") as I do
in one without fish, but it is not articles about all things piscatorial
that keep popping up on regular basis.

This doesn't make socially filtered news useless, just limited and best
suited for finding out what is popular at this moment. They should be a
side dish not the whole diet. Getting some of your information diet from
social sources may improve it, but relying only on them is just stupid.
I wouldn't fret so much if I didn't worry about development trends --
latest Reader changes being one example of them.

Reader had two methods of sharing. Obvious one was button Share which
was adequately replaced with sharing to
[Google+](http://plus.google.com) circles. The other one, which was the
one I actually relied on, was to create public feeds for articles marked
with certain tags. The most important difference is that in first case
you grouped by intended audience and in second by actual content ^<span
id="reading-sources-2">[[2]](#reading-sources-note-2)</span>^. Instead
of following me, you could just follow my selection on particular topic
which in most cases would probably be closer to what you want.

By itself stripping a feature like that doesn't mean much. However when
I also judge other changes such as aforementioned abundance of
whitespace, removal of "Note to reader" and  new reading unfriendly
theme, it's easy to come to conclusion that all roads now lead to
Google+. Reader's role is at best to feed its younger brother with stuff
to socialize around.

It would be wrong to attribute these changes simply to competition with
Facebook since they are a part of a larger trend to social curation. I
find this trend just a normal consequence of a web ecosystem where most
product innovation happens in VC funded startups. How companies were
funded was always a part of their DNA and economics of today's VC
environment for companies that will probably be acquired at some point
(and let's be honest, who REALLY believes most news experiments won't
be?) almost demands a quick and high growth. It's not impossible to
achieve this with sources-based product, but it's certainly harder and
less obvious than creating another twist on social news.

If my first and main point was a personal appeal to seek insight also in
your own, personally picked sources, then my second is to question if
shaping web and world with it should really be left only to industry and
academia. It really doesn't have to be this way.

1.  <div id="reading-sources-note-1">

    </div>

    Browser's history is a great place to see just how much of what we
    visit is unimportant, unrepresentative and often unsharable. A small
    friction necessary for a deliberate act of sharing is actually a
    feature that gives at least a modicum of reflection on content's
    share-worthiness.[↩](#reading-sources-1)
2.  <div id="reading-sources-note-2">

    </div>

    Feeds enable that and are one of crucial building blocks for what I
    started to call *social software for introverts*. It is software
    which is better when used by many, but is good even when you are its
    only user.
    [Instapaper](http://www.instapaper.com/ "Tool for saving pages to read them later")
    would be a perfect example of such an application and
    [Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/ "Evil empire") is a
    counter-example.[↩](#reading-sources-2)

