Title: Reading and travels
Date: 2010-10-06 12:39
Author: markos
Category: Catchall
Slug: reading-and-travels

There is never enough time for hobbies, but I really wish I could read
and travel more. I [plan](http://markos.gaivo.net/blog/?p=608) to do
both, but that in itself poses a problem.

It is hard enough to take the right books and enough of them on a month
long trip, but being on the road for months if not years...Well, it
might not break proverbial camel?s back, but it would probably break
mine.

It would be easier if my relationship to books was more rational. I love
physical books and I tend to read those I want to keep so I can reread
whole or just parts of them later. No computer interface comes close to
pleasure I get from browsing my library. ?Every copy I have can be lend
and many are.

I also buy electronic computer related ?books, which I used to read on
Nokia tablet, but have recently switched to an iPad. I buy electronic
versions mainly because there is no reason to kill a tree for content
that gets obsolete so quickly. Reading on iPad is not fun, but that?s
all right since I am not reading those books to have it.

I can?t tell what bothers me, but I suspect it is either the glowing
screen, its low pixel density or both. But highlighting passages of
text, multiple bookmarks and having a ton of books with you at the same
time has its benefits too. Especially if you are a student with tons of
textbooks to handle (which I am not). iPad also has a great ratio
between what you can do with it and its physicality ? you really
appreciate small size and weight after you?ve carried your backpack for
days).

I also tested Kindle and while reading on it indeed feels nicer (so
maybe glow is to blame), it brings its own set of problems with it. I
wanted to read a book about the ?[4 hour work
week](http://www.amazon.com/4-Hour-Workweek-Escape-Live-Anywhere/dp/0307353133%3FSubscriptionId%3D0G81C5DAZ03ZR9WH9X82%26tag%3Dzemanta-20%26linkCode%3Dxm2%26camp%3D2025%26creative%3D165953%26creativeASIN%3D0307353133 "The 4-Hour Workweek: Escape 9-5, Live Anywhere, and Join the New Rich"),
which seemed interesting enough to read, but not something I want to
own. ?Yet Amazon?s DRM infested Kindle shops are territorially
segregating me, even though I could get a physical copy shipped anywhere
without problems. Knowing why that is doesn?t make it tolerable.

I could live with such e-crap if buying paper and electronic copies
together would not cost significantly more than just buying one. Say 3
to 5 dollars. However it does ?and imagining why ^[[1](#book-1)]^ again
draws no sympathy from me.

So....What do I want?

I?m not sure. Paper wouldn?t get us far. I would like to take less
silicon with us, but two bookworms can?t be fed on one book. Maybe when
we are far enough with our plans, a company like [Pixel
Qi](http://www.pixelqi.com/ "Pixel Qi") will perfected their screens to
the point where we can get best of iPad and Kindle in one device and
Amazon will start selling accessible bundles. I also wish my whole wish
list would be accessible in electronic form, not less than half of it.

However I look at it, compromises will have to be made which means
gadgets will eventually get bought. Hopefully by that time I?ll actually
like reading on them.

1.  <div id="book-1">

    </div>

    You could sell a copy that you got discounted and with that reduce
    publisher?s profit. ?I?m willing to ?bet though that ?those lost 5
    dollars amount to more money than such paranoia saves.

<div class="zemanta-pixie" style="margin-top: 10px; height: 15px;">

[![Enhanced by
Zemanta](http://img.zemanta.com/zemified_e.png?x-id=c8c4ed43-d21a-4a47-8a55-c8ca7e27305e)](http://www.zemanta.com/ "Enhanced by Zemanta")

</div>
