Title: Reading electrons
Date: 2009-03-08 18:45
Author: markos
Category: Catchall
Slug: reading-electrons

My wife and I have a problem. We love buying and reading books, but ran
out of shelf space for them years ago. So we've been storing some of
them in closets and boxes while we find a more suitable solution.

[Like
others](http://pdml.net/pipermail/pdml_pdml.net/2009-February/161396.html)
we love physicality of books and it is hard to imagine buying artifacts
that exist only in digital form. However, while searching for a good
solution I did notice that useful life-span of most technical books is
only few years and that we would save a lot of space and trees if I
bought and read their electronic versions.

This has lead to my renewed interest in state of electronic readers,
which I've been following on and off since I first heard of technology
almost a decade ago. In last few months I got a chance to try first
version of [Kindle](http://www.amazon.com "Amazon Kindle"), read few
chapters on [Sony
Reader](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sony_Reader "Sony Reader") PRS-505,
checked how it feels to do it on [iPod
touch](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPod_Touch "IPod Touch") and read
[Designing Web
Interfaces](http://designingwebinterfaces.com/ "Book's homepage") to the
end on Nokia N770. By the way, I can only recommend that book to anyone
interested in development of web applications.

So this post will be short overview of my experience so far.

**Dedicated electronic readers**

As said, I've used Kindle1 and Sony PRS-505, although my experience so
far has been mostly colored by later. Most if not all such currently
available devices are based on same technology,
[E-ink](http://www.eink.com/), and hence offer fairly similar reading
experience as far as visuals go.

That experience is very good. It's not quite paper, but it is certainly
much nicer to read than computer screens, especially outside. It's most
annoying current limitation is probably absence of colors and depiction
of b&w images in 16 or less shades of gray. You won't be buying photo
books for them any time soon.

What bothered me more though were tendency to use proprietary formats
(Kindle) and absence of search (almost everyone else). I expected that
device designers would notice that electronic format doesn't offer a
chance to flip through pages and remember position of interesting
passages spatially and would counter this by adding a search function,
yet most didn't and as such these devices really are readers and not
researchers.

With good technical books I spend more time looking up pieces of
information than I spent reading it in the first place. I guess I would
be willing to sacrifice search if devices themselves were significantly
cheaper, but since they aren't, I won't be buying one anytime soon.

Still, if you like reading lots of books but don't care about owning
them, you should really look into them. They are simply magnificient
when it comes to packing A LOT of books into tiniest amount of space
without sacrificing much readability. Hell, since most if not all
readers allow you to set text size, it might even be easier to read on
them.

**Tablets**

I own and use two, iPod touch and ancient [Nokia
N770](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nokia_770_Internet_Tablet "Nokia 770 Internet Tablet").
It's a common story with multipurpose devices. You get to do a lot with
them, but you usually have to sacrifice something compared to
specialised gadgets.

I haven't read much on iPod touch and it's unlikely I ever will. It has
a fairly small screen (and screen resolution) that makes it rather
unpleasant to read texts with plenty of tables and diagrams. Pinching
screen looks nice on commercials and doesn't bother me too much when
browsing web, but it gets tiresome quickly enough that I don't want to
do it repeatedly.

I also tried Kindle application, which works well enough for literature,
but is even more limiting than Kindle device. There is no search and you
don't flip through pages all the time only if you are comfortable with
reading text at smallest font size.

Nokia on the other hand has screen good and big enough that I needed to
scroll only in one direction. Since that can be done with the same
button that is used to flip through pages, I could read book using only
one hand, which is nice since it let me read in most impossible body
positions. As iPod touch it also has a color screen that is quite useful
when dealing with technical material. What it lacks though is search in
its PDF viewer that is also missing even in latest maemo incarnation on
OS2008 (checked on Fry's tablet).

Too bad. Nevertheless it will remain my main
[ebook](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E-book "E-book") reading device for
foreseeable future.

**Other observations**

As already noted, I feel current crop of readers are geared mainly to
reading books and not much to browsing or searching. Since most of them
are built on same technological base, it's understandable that their
hardware is very similar, but I was still surprised to see that same
lack of distinction when it comes to features implemented in software.

I thought about buying printed and electronic copy, but changed my mind
when I looked at [price of the
bundle](http://oreilly.com/catalog/9780596516253/index.html). What I
thought I would be buying is convenience. What price suggests to me is a
sale of another copy. I probably would buy both, if price of bundle
would be up to 15% higher than price of printed version.

That does not mean publishers are wrong, since I am hardly a
representative sample, but I suspect I am not the only one who is
thinking about building electronic library before they go ahead and
purchase a reader. This transitioning phase where readers are not
widespread yet might not be long enough to matter anyway and publishers
probably don't care about speeding it along since for most of them
devices are just a content transportation mechanism that isn't owned by
them.

Tablets, with screen and resolution big enough work surprisingly well as
long as you don't try to read under direct sun light. Their other
downsides are much shorter battery life and need for good eye-sight
unless you are willing to scroll a lot.

Still, even though I won't be buying an electronic reader this year, it
is only a matter of time when one of them will replace my tablets as
reading device.

<div class="zemanta-pixie">

[![Reblog this post [with
Zemanta]](http://img.zemanta.com/reblog_e.png?x-id=458d3d42-d0f7-451d-a58b-58e4f57d963b)](http://reblog.zemanta.com/zemified/458d3d42-d0f7-451d-a58b-58e4f57d963b/ "Zemified by Zemanta")<span
class="zem-script more-related"></span>
<script src="http://static.zemanta.com/readside/loader.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</span>

</div>
