Title: Really open social network
Date: 2007-09-05 21:45
Author: markos
Category: Web
Slug: really-open-social-network

I've recently read couple of posts that left an impression on me. First
one was Brad Neuberg's about [personal research
agenda](http://codinginparadise.org/weblog/2007/08/creating-personal-research-agenda.html).
I haven't completed list of my problems yet, but I came far enough to
know I'm not working on any of them.

The other one was about [Blog
2.0](http://www.entrepreneur2be.com/2007/08/26/idea-blog-socialnetworking-blog20/).
I'm more interested in content manipulation than social interactions as
Pownce and Marela are only two social networking applications I use.
Still, ideas contained are intriguing and couple of days before [Data
Sharing Summit](http://datasharingsummit.com/) is the right time to
shamelessly pimp my views.

Build a social application and you will likely, sooner or later,
encounter a dilemma in what your members will be building. Are their
creations mainly personal, an expression of their creativity, or are
they more of a place where people meet and engage?

Most websites don't fall squarely into one or the other. My blog feels
personal not only because I picked the look and topics, but also because
my voice is elevated above others. I doubt I would feel the same if
comments could look like my posts. I like my place and freedom it offers
me.

That's why I don't care all that much about most networks and degrees of
their openness. Really open social network would be interwoven into the
fabric of web. I already have my page, I don't need yet another one. If
buddy list is desired, I can use FOAF. Sharing of my stuff? Feeds. Same
answer for getting other people's stuff. Starting a new network would
mean creating a widget or a few that can be easily integrated in our
sites, maybe some sort of a pinging service if expediency is important
and offering a space for personal page for those, who don't have it yet.

It's amazing how little would need to be changed to implement ideas in
Blog 2.0. Basic technology is already here, it's just not used widely
enough yet. Sure there are a few issues that need to be thought through,
mainly to do with handling privacy correctly, but they are neither big
nor really technological. And price for all this?

Maybe a bit less expediency in content propagation and a bit more work
for network operators, who might need to learn to live with the same
limitations that search engine developers do already. And I'm not even
sure that is really necessary.

*Update:* Thinking a bit more about this I would be happy enough if
social network were just more inclusive. It's fine that you can create
an account and be busy on their platform, but it would be better if you
could join and interact with a social network with your own node for as
long as that met your needs.

