Title: Review of expense tracker Toshl
Date: 2010-06-25 10:35
Author: markos
Category: Catchall
Slug: review-of-expense-tracker-toshl

Three months ago I received an invitation to try and review
[Toshl](http://toshl.com "Toshl"), a mobile expense tracker developed by
[ThirdFrameStudios](http://www.3fs.si "ThirdFrameStudios"). I also
received code to get? Pro account free for first year to help me test
it, which saved me a modest amount of 20 euros. It is also not a secret
that I know people working at 3fs and admire their work.

As influences go, that's it. I received neither threats to pets I don't
have or contributions to a bank account I do have. Also a complete
absence of nudges means that this post took longer than planned and that
all opinions are mine. Too make them less ignorant I decided at start to
give Toshl a proper test and use it for couple of months before passing
judgment.

Toshl, as mentioned, is a tool for keeping track of expenses. You are
obviously sensible enough to know why this is wise, if you are still
reading this, so I won't bother explaining. It comes as a free
application for [Android](http://code.google.com/android/ "Android")
devices and [Maemo](http://www.maemo.org/ "Maemo") based N900. I heard
rumors of an [iPhone](http://www.apple.com/iphone "iPhone 3G") version,
but Symbian or [BlackBerry](http://www.blackberry.com/ "BlackBerry")
owners are out of luck (for now). Using web based companion and
synchronization is free too, but you have to pay for Pro account if you
want to add expenses through website or need a more flexible export of
your data.

I tested Nokia N900 version of Toshl and liked it. I don't want to go
into details since they quickly become boring and there is no better
test than your own (remember, it's free). I was impressed how well it
handles [decimal
separator](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decimal_separator "Decimal separator")
for me, since I sin by using both comma and point.

Entering expenses is easy and quick, especially if you have entered
similar recently, since you can reuse tags just by clicking on
suggested. You also see already entered expenses sorted by time or tags.
There is still room for improvement (like adapting tags suggestions
based on first entered), but not much to fault.

I believe Toshl's goal is to be as simple and fun tracker of everyday
expenses as possible. You can do basic add and removal of expenses,
export inserted data, categorize each entry with tags and see few
different reports. That's it. There is no integration with banks,
currency conversions,? or even a notion of income. Reports are basic and
I am not a fan of those included.

I usually used more than one tag on each expense and had difficulty
wrapping my head around graphs where same expense could be shown
multiple times. I failed at judging how much impact do some expenses
have overall without at least some tweaking of graphs. I am certain that
Tufte would call it chartjunk, but their implementation certainly is fun
to play with.

And that's where Toshl's main strength is. A fun way of doing something
that most people find incredibly tedious. You might overgrow it one day
and switch, but it will help you develop a necessary habit of recording
your expenses.

Being simple and fun doesn't mean powerless. Tags free you to your own
categorization and multiple export options give you an opportunity to
massage that data further in tools of your choice. It might not be as
trivial as clicking on a graph is, but doing it in Excel is not much
harder.

I will not continue to use it because I am that sort of person who gets
off on [double-entry
bookkeeping](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double-entry_bookkeeping_system "Double-entry bookkeeping system").
I've been using [GnuCash](http://www.gnucash.org/ "GnuCash") for years
and there is no easy way to sync data with it (probably shouldn't be
either) and few reasons to input every expense twice. I do recommend
anyone who isn't tracking yet or is not satisfied with his current
approach to give Toshl a try.

And if you are happy with free version, then buy a Pro account. It costs
little, gives you features as polished as rest of service and it help
secure your apps future.

###### Related articles by Zemanta {.zemanta-related-title}

-   [Toshl expense tracking app is web connected and I love it for
    that!](http://www.intomobile.com/2010/04/04/toshl-expense-tracking-app-is-web-connected-and-i-love-it-for-that.html)
    (intomobile.com)
-   [Personal finance software - Free download the ultimate
    Gnucash](http://techblissonline.com/personal-finance-software-free-download-gnucash/)
    (techblissonline.com)

<div class="zemanta-pixie">

[![Enhanced by
Zemanta](http://img.zemanta.com/zemified_e.png?x-id=44d2c12e-bb01-4a24-82ab-5db6e9ce7664)](http://www.zemanta.com/ "Enhanced by Zemanta")

</div>
