Title: Riffs' logo hinting
Date: 2005-11-21 12:55
Author: markos
Category: UI, Web
Slug: riffs-logo-hinting

I found a link to [Riffs](http://www.riffs.com) at [Jon
Hick's](http://www.hicksdesign.co.uk/journal/riffs-your-social-recommender "Jon's blog")
blog. I don't know much about their service, but I really like how logo
gives you a direct clue to where you'll go when you hover over it. It's
little things like this that make good interfaces great.

On the other hand I'm not fond of alpha or beta signs on services that
are not finished yet. It's been my experience that most users,
especially more inexperienced ones, have no idea what that was supposed
to mean.

That's why we went with **"v pripravi"** stamp on [our
site](http://www.marela.si), which is a short slovene description that
we're still preparing this yet unfinished site. It's been very well
received even though stamp doesn't look real and doesn't fit the rest of
design all that well either. I believe the importance of language used
can't be overstated and jargon that you don't share with your users must
simply be completely avoided.

By the way, for those who've seen Marela, the reason why there's a
mismatch between the stamp (together with the first page) and otherwise
great design is that former was done by me and later by immensely
talented guys at [clear:left](http://www.clearleft.com/). If you ever
need a dedicated and passionate bunch of web developers who'll go beyond
their duty for a very reasonable fee, you really should give them a
call.

