Title: Sabbatical
Date: 2010-09-14 20:20
Author: markos
Category: Catchall
Slug: sabbatical

Ale≈° recently
[wrote](http://blog.spetic.si/2010/09/importance-of-sabbatical.html)
about importance of
[sabbatical](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sabbatical "Sabbatical"). I
could not agree more.

I don't really regret much in my life, but I do regret not taking long
vacations between jobs. The closest I got was taking two weeks off
before coming to [Zemanta](http://www.zemanta.com "Zemanta").

I used to be even worse. I hardly spent any of my vacation time,
probably in juvenile notion that it makes me (look) dedicated. It
didn't. However it did make me more tired, less useful and less happy.

We all have hobbies or projects we would love to do if only we could
find time for them. If you don't, you really ought to find something.
I've never met a creative person interested in only one thing. Living
for your job really sucks if it ends and someday it almost certainly
will.

Sabbaticals are great because you have time to decompress from last job
before throwing yourself into new one, to do at least some of that stuff
you've been dying to do and to hopefully get a fresh perspective on
where you are going.

I find traveling great for getting perspective. Things really do look
different from distance and you should get as much of it as you can - in
time and geography. I haven't taken a sabbatical yet and it will
probably be few more years before I do, but I do take a long vacation
each year somewhere as different as possible from what I am used to.

Recommendation on what to see and do in [Costa
Rica](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Costa_Rica "Costa Rica") are hence
welcome.

###### Related articles by Zemanta {.zemanta-related-title}

-   [Importance of
    sabbatical](http://blog.spetic.si/2010/09/importance-of-sabbatical.html)
    (spetic.si)
-   [How To Take A Sabbatical From
    Work](http://www.forbes.com/2010/08/24/sabbatical-leave-work-leadership-careers-advice.html)
    (forbes.com)
-   [More than one million workers take
    sabbatical](http://r.zemanta.com/?u=http%3A//www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/personalfinance/7979795/More-than-one-million-workers-take-sabbatical.html&a=23812953&rid=6575b7b5-6796-49cd-9fe0-7c041ffe88ab&e=3dd8180bf2cca84c91d100d18bde6fbd)
    (telegraph.co.uk)
-   [Saving for a
    Sabbatical](http://job-satisfaction.suite101.com/article.cfm/saving-for-a-sabbatical)
    (job-satisfaction.suite101.com)

<div class="zemanta-pixie">

[](http://www.zemanta.com/ "Enhanced by Zemanta")

</div>
