Title: Sign-up, Facebook Connect and ownership
Date: 2010-06-08 20:35
Author: markos
Category: General development, UI, Web
Slug: sign-up-and-facebook-connect

[Joshua Porter's](http://bokardo.com "Joshua Porter") workshop at recent
UX London conference was great and a must see if you can, but there is
something that's been bugging me since. In discussion about difficulties
of getting people to sign-up for service, Joshua mentioned how some
companies see connecting with [Facebook
Connect](http://developers.facebook.com/connect.php "Facebook Connect")
as Facebook "owning" their users.

They are right, but it doesn't matter much. Relying on Facebook for
authentication certainly makes Facebook sort of a gatekeeper. This does
not matter because it can and should be a transitional phase in an
evolving relationship.

My view is based on assumption that company wants to build a long
lasting relationship with a customer. This may not be true, but then
there really is no point in having a sign-up at all. Avoid friction of
one, make a trade and move on.

I think most user lifecycle strategies look like trying to get laid by
the end of evening while hoping to start a long-term relationship. It
might work, but how likely?

There are two things relationships need. Continuing benefit to parties
involved and mutual trust. And trust is built through actions over time.

Traditional UX life cycle can be seen as:

> Awareness -\> Sign-up -\> First-time use -\> Engagement -\> Referral

Each step has to offer more benefits to person taking it as it requires
more trust. Moving sign-up after first-time use changes dynamic by
making service prove itself before asking same of its user.

Using Facebook Connect (or [OAuth](http://oauth.net "OAuth"),
[OpenID](http://openid.net "OpenID Foundation")...) is just going
further in mimicking natural relationship building. It's asking of a
smaller commitment at a fragile stage of relationship. You can ask for a
bigger commitment with your own authentication later on, when you have
already proven your worth and gain enough trust. You could even offer
something available only to "full" members to make such commitment more
enticing.

If you are building years long relationship like I have with Amazon,
does it really matter if you get me to fully sign-up after third month
instead of first?

Hence sign-up should be thought of as a gradual process taken over time
instead of one-time obstacle.

All this is just speculation at this point, but I hope to test it on two
projects this year. If I do, I'll let you know how it went.

<div class="zemanta-pixie">

[![Reblog this post [with
Zemanta]](http://img.zemanta.com/reblog_e.png?x-id=ef945133-8712-4aa1-9413-aa52f5f6c2c5)](http://reblog.zemanta.com/zemified/ef945133-8712-4aa1-9413-aa52f5f6c2c5/ "Reblog this post [with Zemanta]")

</div>
