Title: Standardized luggage sizes
Date: 2007-05-18 10:49
Author: markos
Category: Catchall
Slug: standardized-luggage-sizes

It's getting more and more horrible to travel around with planes.
Senseless airport rules or those which benefit only airport employees
can still get me angry even days after return home. These days I
wouldn't dare to change planes at Heathrow unless I had at least two
hours to do so and would need at least 3 hours not to be nervous about
it. Still, there's a positive side to it. It makes coming through the
home door a happier event.

Somehow I don't mind the actual waiting at the airport. On our last trip
we, my wife and I, waited several hours for our next flight which gave
us ample time to sit in cafeterias and observe functioning of an
airport.

We watched couple of men loading luggage on a plane and unsurprisingly
they didn't handle suitcases gently. Our fairly new samsonite is a
witness that this is quite common and I don't expect it to last for more
than a few more years unless we reduce amount of traveling we do. Still,
I was astonished to see how far they can throw big heavy suitcases. It
certanly can't be good for their backs.

Looking at flying luggage got me thinking. Wouldn't it be better if the
whole process of loading and unloading bags could be mostly if not
completely automated?

It could be done the same way as it was done with ship containers. Just
standardize a few sizes in which all suitcases would come and build
airplane cargo areas that take those sizes into an account. I believe
you could handle most luggage completely automatically and use human
gorillas only for pieces that don't fit.

You could also stimulate adoption with appropriate weight or pricing
benefits for those who would use such luggage. This way we'd all win. Or
is there something I'm missing?

