Title: Tweaking pages
Date: 2008-10-28 08:59
Author: markos
Category: UI, Web
Slug: tweaking-pages

I recently came back from Berlin, where I publicly asked [John
Lily](http://john.jubjubs.net/ "John's homepage") why haven't they
integrated [Greasemonkey](http://www.greasespot.net/ "Greasemonkey")
into [Firefox](http://www.mozilla.com/en-US/firefox/ "Firefox"). Wrong
question can hardly lead to right answer. What I really wanted to know
was:

*"Why doesn't [Mozilla](http://mozilla.com "Mozilla") integrate
Greasemonkey-LIKE functionality in a browser?"*

Browser is at the farthest reach of web creators. It's them who decide
how a page will look like when it gets loaded and what visitors will be
able to do with it. User actions that were not anticipated by page
designers are limited to printing a page, tweaking its display a bit
with user style sheets, seeing its source and copying text elsewhere.

Browser is also an application that is loaded on someone's computer and
belongs to him, as much as software can belong to somebody in
EULA-infested world. Not every browser is equal, but pretty much all of
them limit what you can do with page (beyond its creators intentions)Â 
to above actions. The real question than for me becomes:

*"To whom does a browser belong to?"*

One reason why I love Greasemonkey is that it enabled me to fix and
change pages that I find lacking. Not every page has navigation where it
should be and lots of them display parts of text in illegibly small
letters. It can also help me plug different services together. It is
indeed geeky, as Brady Forrest observed, but useful implementation
doesn't need to be. I find [Platypus
extension](http://platypus.mozdev.org/) a good first step to how a
browser could further empower its users in customizing pages even
further to their needs.

I thought about downsides to this since Thursday and I'm failing to find
anything substantial.

<div class="zemanta-pixie">

[![Reblog this post [with
Zemanta]](http://img.zemanta.com/reblog_e.png?x-id=371a642d-6da1-4089-8b93-ef701f1cdb08)](http://reblog.zemanta.com/zemified/371a642d-6da1-4089-8b93-ef701f1cdb08/ "Zemified by Zemanta")

</div>
