Title: Two button movie player interface
Date: 2006-04-21 11:39
Author: markos
Category: UI
Slug: two-button-movie-player-interface

A colleague of mine told me a story couple of days ago, how he sat up a
linux box for a friend so he could watch movies on his TV. By itself
nothing surprising, since I'm sure we all know plenty of people who do
just this or something very similar.

However, what did surprise me was the user interface my colleague built
(as requested) for his friend. It has two buttons. First one starts
playing first movie on the alphabetically ordered list. Second one
deletes the first movie on the list.

It's as simple as it could possibly get, but it forces you to adapt your
behavior to it. Mind you that's true for all interfaces, it's just that
this one makes it more obvious. Like in cinema you have to see the movie
in one go or start from beginning and watch parts already seen. To see
movie down the list you either need to see all before or chose not to
see them at all. In a way, I'd say it's an interface of a true movie
buff. You watch all movies and when you do, you do it without
compromising.

I find it highly fascinating even though I don't know why. Is it the
strange interface, the fact that someone wanted it or something else?
I'm not sure. I'm intrigued at how easy it has become to build your own
interface and I'm sure it will get even easier. Yet this is not what
fascinates me. But for some reason I just can't get his story out of my
head.

