Title: W3C and old web
Date: 2007-06-18 13:06
Author: markos
Category: Web
Slug: w3c-and-old-web

Andy is among many feeling
[frustrated](http://www.andybudd.com/archives/2007/06/whither_w3c/index.php)
with slow progress of CSS3 specifications and role W3C plays or should
play in their birth. Having no part in any standardization process with
corresponding amount of experience in developing a specification, I'm
certainly ill qualified for comment on it with any reasonable amount of
certainty.

I am, for better or worse, a blogger and I was at WWW2007, so I do have
an opinion that like any true blogger find irresistible not to share
even if it is in all likelihood wrong. In short, I believe the current
state is a result of fairly insignificant intersection between people
feeling the pain and those able to do much about it.

At first we wanted to present information and nineties were largely
spent developing tools to do so in efficient enough manner. Partial
browser stagnation, Mozilla development and CSS2 together with
HTML4/XHTML1 more or less brought it far enough that we started having
bigger dreams, wanting to do new stuff with our data. Just displaying it
on a page doesn't feel enough anymore.

These days there is a lot of talk about semantic web, which doesn't mean
same to all people, but is mostly understood as adding meaning to
published outputs in ways friendlier to later manipulation and hence
more useful. Tools ranging from feeds and microformats to SPARQL might
be different, but most are marching in same direction.

This doesn't mean that current set of standards are perfect, but they
are good enough that most of W3C doesn't see them as a still open
problem and has moved on to work on other more important things. You can
probably listen to Tim Berners-Lee for hours these days without him
muttering words HTML or CSS. They are also good enough for general
public, which doesn't care much about how something is done as long as
it appears to work, to get what it wants.

There are approximately as many Pandas in world as developers with a
sense of esthetics, so it is hardly surprising that people bothered
enough with current state to complain are mainly designers who care
about doing things right. Sadly they are not usually well represented in
standards bodies and as mentioned there isn't an outside pressure that
could compensate.

The only hope I see for new push comes from browser makers who probably
don't want be relegated to a part of an easily replaceable platform for
running Flash/Silverlight/Whathaveyou plugins. Hopefully money flowing
to them from search engines is good enough to finance a greater effort
than one done so far.

