Title: Website soundtrack
Date: 2005-10-21 16:48
Author: markos
Category: UI, Web
Slug: website-soundtrack

I'm not ashamed to admit, although I maybe should be, that Thursday
evenings are reserved for TV. I'm a sucker for good detective series and
it's then when most of them are on. I haven't really noticed until
recently how important a theme song is to set the mood and I got to
think more about it yesterday, while watching CSI: NY (by the way, CSI:
Miami is just crap and should be scrapped).

Shouldn't every website and program have its own soundtrack?

I'm not talking about annoying
[muzak](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elevator_music) of flash intros. I
despise them as much as the next person and much good would be done if
they all disappeared tomorrow. I'm thinking of soundtracks more as a
development tool. When we are building stuff (websites, programs or
whatever), we try to imagine things like who our typical user will be
and what kind of mood or feeling are we trying to provoke, which is not
always easy. It's easy to create a bland descriptions alright, but I
find them of limited help when trying to really imagine, to connect with
what they'll experience.

We all listen to music that talks to us. And it also talks about us.
Isn't it sometimes just easier to describe what we are trying to do with
a song or two?

If we did that, what would happen when listening to them while using the
website?

I think a good website would blend with a soundtrack previously made to
capture its emotional experience. If it doesn't, then there's a problem
and if I'm sure that soundtrack is just right, then I should change my
website until I don't feel a dichotomy anymore.

