Title: WordPress "sucks"
Date: 2005-10-06 13:53
Author: markos
Category: Spletne urice, UI
Slug: wordpress-sucks

I think our first talk was a success. It certainly exceeded my
expectations and I hope that most of those who were there feel the same.
I was happy to see that a lot of us didn't just leave, but stayed to
enjoy conversation with other visitors. I hope this will become even
more common and expected.

I got a chance to talk to several people I wanted to meet or whom
haven't seen in a long time and I immensely enjoyed myself. Our
conversations covered many topic, one of which was
[WordPress](http://http://www.wordpress.org/) where I made some
statements that on reflection probably deserve an explanation.

I said that Wordpress sucks.

This is not true and I don't actually mean it, but it is as true as what
[wordpress.org](http://http://www.wordpress.org/) has to say about its
product:

> WordPress is a state-of-the-art semantic personal publishing platform
> with a focus on aesthetics, web standards, and usability.

I use WordPress, but I can't say I enjoy the experience. It's certainly
not worse than most similar stuff out there, but I think best have moved
on. I don't find default installation particularly pleasant to look at,
its usability is questionable and in an age of WYSIWYG editors and
online spell checkers, it's hardly state-of-the-art either.

It's still a good software and I wouldn't nag, if the page didn't also
say:

> More simply, WordPress is what you use when you want to work with your
> blogging software, not fight it.

Now that is pure crap. It would take too long to list everything I
believe they got wrong, so I'll concentrate on a couple of issues to
illustrate my frustrations.

There are things that are plain stupid. Theme editor tells me I could
edit my template directly, if I made files writable. True, and I
wouldn't be the only person who could do that anymore. So you have a
theme editor that is either useless or a security problem.

And then there are things like user levels. As an administrator of
WordPress you have to decide what level a user should be, but there's
not even a word of explanation in user interface about what that means.
No hint, nothing. Sure, it's explained in wordpress documentation, but
is there a link to contextual help available on that screen? To any help
whatsoever? No.

It's stuff like this that makes me think WordPress has a long way to go
for an average user.

