Title: WWW2007
Date: 2007-05-11 18:17
Author: markos
Category: General development, Web
Slug: www2007

[WWW2007](http://www2007.org/) is wrapping up tomorrow, but today is the
last day I am attending. It's been really refreshing to be at a web
oriented gathering without hearing anybody say: "Web 2.0".

I enjoyed listening to talks and learned that I have to brush up my math
and maybe learn a new thing or two. I still learned a lot despite my
personal shortcomings.

My original reason for attending was
[AIRWeb07](http://airweb.cse.lehigh.edu/2007/), a workshop on
adversarial information retrieval on web, because I wanted to learn what
anti-spam community is working on and what sort of ideas and tools are
being discussed.

The answer to an outsider like me seems mainly to be a problem of web
spam polluting search engines and algorithms trying to discover spam
pages from graphs of connected pages.

It is a very simplified description, probably even too simplified, and I
have to say that I admire the work and ideas done and shown at the
conference. At the same time I was very surprised that focus has been so
much on links and practically none on characteristics of spam pages
themselves (with notable exception of a submission by [Gordon
Cormack](http://plg.uwaterloo.ca/~gvcormac/)). I understand that
crawlers are somewhat out of vogue in research community, but it still
seemed kind of odd.

It is as if someone trying to know me would completely ignore what I say
and solely concentrate on who am I hanging out with and how do I go
about it. It seemed to me that the best way would be to combine both,
which is what prof. Cormack proposed as well.

In a way I think I may understand this focus. It's very easy to add spam
links on an open participatory web and obviously nobody can control what
gets published on all those pages out there. So it's natural for search
companies to concentrate on points that they do control, like their
index.

Still, I feel as if not enough has been done on preventing stuff like
comment spam. Better tools would only lead to more isolated spam pages
and therefore to an easier extraction of spam networks from an index.

Then again, I don't do this kind of research for a living and may be
only talking nonsense.

The other thing that's been on my mind is a general agreement that this
is an arms race and one which won't be won unless financial incentives
driving spammers can be eliminated. Question came up if we should try to
break our own protections (as cryptographers do) and how would we fare?

I have no doubt that people I met fighting spam are much smarter than
most of their opponents, which is why I don't doubt that they could do
it. I doubt only if they should do it.

It's not really intuitive that the best thing in an arms race would be
to show the other side how to build a nuke. Especially when it seems we
are busy enough fighting problem in its current variations. Then again,
I'm not convinced it's a bad idea either.

I won't go much into other talks, as I feel even less qualified to judge
and anyone can get a better insight just by reading accepted papers that
are all available online. What I heard or read has been in general of a
high quality and if this year is anything to go by, then try to attend
next one, which will be next April in Beijing.

By the way, visiting Banff is a must even without a conference as an
excuse, since the place and even more its surroundings are just
stunning. And if you do decide to go, do yourself a favor and contact
[Alicyn](http://www.tarry.ca/) for a place to stay.

